
Tom shook his head. “I don’t know. Where do you suppose we can find
out?”

“I guess dad knows. I’ll ask him this evening. I hope it doesn’t cost
very much. A dog license costs three dollars, but I suppose that hasn’t
anything to do with an automobile license. How long do you think it
will take you to learn to run the thing, Tom?”

“About a week, I guess,” replied Tom vaguely. “Of course, there’s lots
to learn about the engine part of it, but I guess you don’t have to
know all that at first. There’s the bell. I’ll meet you after school,
Will. And――and don’t be late, will you? It would be fierce if we got
there and found Saunders had sold the car!”

But that fear proved vain when, five minutes after dismissal, the two
boys reached the carriage works, rather anxious and quite breathless.
The car was still there, looking, if anything, a trifle more
dilapidated than before. Mr. Saunders had to be summoned from somewhere
on the floor above, and, while they awaited him, they again looked over
the car. It wasn’t a very commodious car. The rear seat was quite wide
enough to take three passengers comfortably, but there was precious
little leg room for them.

“Not much room for bags,” commented Willard.

“We could put them in front,” said Tom. “It wouldn’t be very often we’d
get more than three passengers at a load. I wonder what kind of a car
it is.”

“Gasoline,” suggested Willard, with a laugh.

“I mean what make. There ought to be a name on it somewhere.”

But search failed to reveal any until Willard found some almost
illegible lettering on a brass plate running along the edge of the
front flooring. They finally deciphered it. “Treffry Motor Co.” was the
legend.

“Ever hear of a Treffry car?” asked Willard.

“Yes, I think so. I wonder how old it is. Saunders says three years,
but I’ll wager――――”

He didn’t have time to state what he was willing to wager, however, for
at that moment Mr. Saunders appeared on the scene. Willard acted as
spokesman.

“Back again, Mr. Saunders,” he announced carelessly.

“So I see.” The carriage man didn’t seem overly glad to find him there,
Tom thought.

“Yes, I got to thinking it over, and I dropped in to make you an offer.”

“All right; let’s hear it. I’m sort of busy this afternoon.”

“Well, I want to have a man come up here and look the car over. If
he says it can be repaired reasonably, I’ll pay you a hundred and
twenty-five dollars for it, fifty dollars cash and the balance at the
rate of twenty dollars a month.”

“My terms was a hundred and fifty cash,” said Mr. Saunders.

“Yes, but like as not you were expecting to pay ten or fifteen dollars’
commission to someone,” responded Willard cheerfully. “You won’t have
to pay any commission, and that will save something.”

“H-m; and what about interest?”

“Interest?”

“Sure; interest on the balance of seventy-five dollars you’d be owing
me. It would be four months before I’d get the last of it.”

“Oh, I see.” Willard looked doubtfully at Tom. “Well, I suppose
interest at three per cent.――――”

“Three per cent.! Jumpin’ Jupiter! The legal rate is five!”

“Is it? On automobiles?”

“On anything. I guess you don’t know a whole lot, after all, son. You
want a fellow to come here and take the car to pieces?”

“Well, look it over, you know.”

“Yes, and leave it spread all over the place, like as not, so I’ll
never be able to get it together again! Who you going to send here?”

“A man named Brennan, who works――――”

“Jimmy Brennan at the machine shop? I know him. Well, all right, but
he’s got to put things together the way he finds ’em. You tell him
that.”

“I will, Mr. Saunders. Now will you give me a refusal of the car until
I hear what Mr. Brennan says about it?”

“I don’t know about that. I might miss a sale. How soon is he comin’,
and when will you know whether you want to buy her or not?”

“I’m going to try and get him to come to-morrow. Then just as soon as I
hear what he says――――”

“I’ll give you an option until this time to-morrow, and that’s the best
I can do,” said Mr. Saunders with finality. “Take it, or leave it. A
hundred and twenty-five isn’t enough, anyway, for an automobile like
that. Why, that car cost, new, ’most fifteen hundred dollars, I guess!”

“That isn’t very long,” said Willard, “but if it’s the best you’ll do,
all right. Only I’m afraid Mr. Brennan is so busy――――”

“Tell him to come this evening. I’ll give him the key if he will stop
at my house. He knows where I live.”

“Thanks. I’ll ask him to, then. Much obliged.” As they started out Mr.
Saunders called Tom back.

“Look here,” he whispered, “I agreed to give you ten dollars, son, but
that was for selling her for a hundred and fifty. This fellow’s only
going to pay a hundred and twenty-five, and not all cash, either. So I
can’t give you more’n five dollars; understand?”

“I don’t want any commission at all, thank you, Mr. Saunders,” replied
Tom.

“Oh!” Mr. Saunders looked relieved. “Well, that’s all right, then. Can
this fellow pay the money? Who is he?”

“He can pay, all right, Mr. Saunders. His name is Willard Morris. His
father――――”

“I know. All right.”

“But why didn’t you take the five?” asked Willard, when Tom repeated
the conversation outside. “Every dollar helps, you know.”

“Yes, but it didn’t seem quite fair, when I was sort of half buying it
myself.”

“No, that’s so. Now you’d better talk to your father first, and then
I’ll say my piece.”




                              CHAPTER III

                          MR. BENTON SAYS YES


Mr. Benton was at his desk, in the little, partitioned-off office, and
the boys quite filled the tiny space. Perhaps Tom’s father had been
thinking about the plan since the evening before, and had changed his
views, for it required hardly any persuasion to gain his agreement.
“Yes, Tom, I’ll advance you fifty dollars, if you decide to buy it,”
he said, when Tom had explained. “But you mustn’t come to me for any
more afterward, because I simply can’t let you have it. We’ll make a
business proposition of it, and you’ll pay me back the fifty from time
to time. Is that satisfactory?”

“Yes, sir; thank you.”

“Very well. When do you want the money?”

“To-morrow afternoon, sir, if we want it at all.”

“I’ll have it ready for you. I’m glad you’re going to share the risk
with him, Willard. Two heads are better than one. Besides, if the plan
fails, you’ll each stand to lose less. That all you wanted, Tom?”

“Yes, sir. I’m awfully much obliged, father. And――and, if we buy that
car, we’re going to make a go of it, aren’t we, Will?”

“We certainly are! We’ve got to!”

They climbed over a pile of empty mail bags and made their way out of
the post-office with jubilant faces.

“Isn’t that great?” demanded Tom.

“Fine and dandy! Now, let’s hustle down and find this fellow Brennan.
We’ve got to persuade him to look that car over to-night.”

It was a good stiff walk to the railroad, and then they had to go
along the track for some distance to where Gerrish & Hanford’s machine
shop stood――a rickety, brown, wooden building, filled with the din and
clatter of machinery. Jimmy Brennan proved to be a small, red-haired
chap, some four years older than Willard. He had a smooch of black
grease on his tilted nose, which lent his countenance quite a weird
expression. Jimmy――for it wasn’t long before they were calling him
that――heard their errand and asked no questions until Willard had
finished. Then:

“Sure,” he agreed. “I’ll look her over for you, but I don’t see how
I can do it to-night, boys. I got a sort of an engagement for this
evening. Maybe to-morrow night――――”

“But we’ve only got the option until to-morrow afternoon,” objected
