I don’t think that either Willard or Tom showed up very brilliantly
that day at studies. Their minds were much too full of the automobile.
At recess they stole away from the crowd and sat side by side on the
granite coping beyond the library and talked it all over again, and
could scarcely wait for school to end so that they could get the money
and seal the bargain with Mr. Saunders. Tom became so interested that
he quite forgot to finish his luncheon, and the bell found him still
possessed of two perfectly good bananas and a piece of chocolate layer
cake. He managed the cake on the way back, however, and consigned the
bananas to his pockets for future reference.

At three-thirty the bargain was completed. Willard’s father, whose
cabinet shop was but two blocks distant, was on hand and he and the
carriage man soon had the papers fixed up. Willard engaged to pay the
sum of twenty dollars monthly until the full amount of one hundred and
twenty-five dollars had been paid. The interest was to be at five per
cent., and the title of the car remained with Mr. Saunders until the
final payment had been made. Tom handed over his fifty dollars in cash,
Willard and his father signed the papers and the car, to all intents
and purposes, was theirs!

Mr. Saunders had demurred at first at having to include storage of the
Bentons’ buggy in his part of the bargain, but Willard had been firm
and in the end the carriage man had consented. Mr. Morris went back
to his shop and Tom and Willard hurried down Main Street and around
to the rear of the hotel, to where Connors’ stables stood. There a
bargain was soon made. The liveryman was to go to Saunders’ shop with
a stout rope and haul the automobile over to the Bentons’ stable. At
first he wanted a dollar and a quarter, but the boys beat him down
to seventy-five cents. From there they hurried around to Tom’s house
and Tom found the stable key. After they had run the buggy out to the
yard they looked over the quarters. The carriage room was not very
large, but it would serve the purpose well enough. Tom pointed out
that they could build a bench under the window at the side and after
a while make their own repairs. Fortunately the stable had been wired
for electricity a few years before and Jimmy Brennan would have no
difficulty finding plenty of light for his work. Some boxes and a
decrepit wheelbarrow were moved into the box-stall out of the way and
Tom found an old stable broom and swept the floor fairly clean.

“We’ll have to put up some shelves, I suppose, for oil and grease and
things,” said Tom. “And where can we keep the gasoline if we get a
barrel full at a time?”

“Dad says you’ll have to keep it out of doors and away from buildings,”
replied Willard. “Let’s have a look.”

So they went outside and soon found a place for it some twelve feet
from the stable and a little further from the house. It was rather far
from the grass-grown drive that led from stable to street, but Tom
declared that it wouldn’t be any trick to lug the gasoline in a pail
from the barrel to the car. Besides, he pointed out, there was a pear
tree there and the foliage would serve as a roof. To make assurance
doubly sure Tom went into the house and informed Jimmy Brennan by
telephone that the car would be there that evening ready for him to
work on. Then the boys each took a shaft of the buggy and gaily started
along Cross Street for Saunders’ Carriage Works. They had only three
blocks to go with it, but it seemed as though every fellow they knew
was encountered in that short journey! Near the corner of Spruce
Street, Jimmy Lippit was leaning over his front gate and hailed them
with delight.

“Get ap!” he shouted. “Where you going with the buggy, Tom?”

“Saunders’,” replied Tom.

“Have you got a new horse?”

“No, I’m taking it over to have it stored.”

“Give me a ride, will you?” Jimmy, who was a slim, freckle-faced boy of
fifteen, emerged from his yard and joined them. “Go on, Tom, let me get
in there, will you?”

“No, sir, you keep out of there. Hi, there! Quit that!”

Teddy Thurston had stolen up behind and was pushing heroically, and
Tom and Willard had to dig their heels in the dirt to keep from being
run down. Willard chased Teddy to the sidewalk, but in the meantime
Jimmy had crawled into the buggy. It took several minutes to dislodge
him and by the time he was pulled out four or five other fellows had
congregated. Tom and Willard were vastly outnumbered and the buggy
completed its journey most spectacularly. Jimmy Lippit and a boy named
Converse occupied the seat, two small boys sat in the box behind and
the rest helped pull. The buggy crossed Washington Street in defiance
of all speed regulations――if there were any in Audelsville――and to the
accompaniment of much laughter and shouting. Jimmy held an imaginary
pair of reins and cracked an imaginary whip, while Converse clutched
him in simulated terror as the vehicle bounded over the car rails.

“Git ap!” shouted Jimmy.

“Save me! Save me!” shrieked Converse. “They’re running away!”

“Faster, you old plugs!” commanded Jimmy, slashing the imaginary whip.
“Faster, or I’ll sell the lot of you!”

Down Walnut Street they galloped, the buggy creaking and protesting in
every spring and rivet, and drew up with a final flourish in front of
the carriage works.

“_Whoa!_” shouted Jimmy. “_Whoa_, you ponies! Say, I guess I’m some
driver, fellows! Did you see me pull ’em back on their haunches? Mr.
Saunders, please unharness my steeds.”

Mr. Saunders, who had emerged from the shop in response to the hubbub,
grinned as he directed Tom to take the buggy further along and run it
on to the elevator. “You tell your father that if he wants to sell this
he’s to let me know. I might find a customer for it. When you going to
fetch that automobile away?”

“Connors said he’d send right over for it,” answered Tom.

“He’s coming now, I think,” said Willard, as a team drawn by a pair of
dancing, half-broken colts came around the corner.

If the trip with the buggy had been exciting the journey home with the
automobile was more so. Tom and Willard refused to answer questions,
but that didn’t keep the others from piling into the automobile
as soon as it was under way. Jimmy secured the driver’s seat and
performed wonderfully on the wheezy horn all the way to the stable.
Tom and Willard chose to accompany the car on foot, but the rest of
the fellows all managed to get into or onto it, and the new owners
feared for the springs. No accidents happened, however, although
when the young horses were confronted by a trolley car on Washington
Street it looked for a minute as though there would be a runaway with
a second-hand automobile doing a snap-the-whip through town. Tom and
Willard had to laugh to see how quickly the boys tumbled out of the car
when the horses began to plunge! Finally, however, the car was safely
deposited in the yard and helping hands rolled it into the stable, or,
as Tom had begun to call it now, the garage.

It was no longer possible to avoid an explanation and so the two boys
acknowledged that they had bought the car.

“What you going to do with it?” demanded Teddy Thurston, kicking a
tattered tire contemptuously.

“Oh, just――just run it,” answered Willard.

Jimmy laughed loudly. “I’d like to see either of you fellows run an
auto! Besides, if it will run why didn’t you run it around here instead
of having it hauled?”

“It isn’t in running order now,” replied Tom with dignity. “We’re going
to have it all fixed up.”

“Bet you it will take some fixing,” observed another youth. “Looks to
me like it was ready to fall apart. Did you have to buy it or did he
give it to you?”

“He traded it for the buggy,” said Jimmy, “and gave him something to
boot. You can’t beat old Saunders on a trade!”

“That’s all right,” replied Willard smilingly. “You fellows will be
standing around begging for a ride in a week or two.”

“Yes, we will!” jeered Teddy. “I wouldn’t trust myself in that thing
with you for a thousand dollars, Will!”

“All right; remember that,” said Willard. “Hustle along now; we’re
going to lock up!”

“Lock up!” exclaimed Jimmy with a wicked grin. “Great shakes! You don’t
think anyone’s going to _steal_ it, do you?”

The visitors thought of a great many other gibes before they finally
dispersed, leaving Tom and Willard in sole possession of the front
steps. Long after he was out of sight under the trees that lined the
street they could hear Jimmy Lippit imitating the wheezy horn on which
he had performed so busily.

The two boys said nothing for a space. Then Willard broke the silence.

“Well, we got it, Tom,” he said.

Tom nodded. “It――it didn’t look quite so bunged-up when it was in
Saunders’, did it?”

“No.” Willard pulled a twig from the honeysuckle vine and sniffed it
thoughtfully. “I say, Tom.”

“Yep?”

“We――we’re putting an awful lot of money into this. Suppose we didn’t
make it go!”

“But Brennan says it’ll go――――”

“I mean suppose the scheme didn’t go, Tom. Think of the money we’d
lose!”

“I know.” Tom nodded. “I don’t like to think of it, Will. We――we’ve
just got to make it go! That’s all there is to it! We’ve just _got_ to,
Will!”




                              CHAPTER VI
