
                        WILLARD GOES ON STRIKE


“I’m afraid,” observed Willard, laying his brush down and straightening
some of the kinks from his back, “that there’ll be more gnats and flies
on here than paint. Wonder how it would do to rig a mosquito netting
over us, Tom.”

“They are pretty bad, and that’s a fact,” agreed Tom without ceasing
the slap-slap of his brush. “I’ve picked off a couple of hundred this
morning, I guess.”

They were in the stable loft, with the swinging doors wide open and the
little back yard and garden spread beneath them in the hot sunshine
of a mid-June day. It was Saturday morning and they were courageously
applying the second coat of gray paint to the automobile body. Jimmy
Brennan had suggested that it would be a simple matter to hoist the
body up into the loft by block and tackle and that up there it would
be both out of his way and where the boys could work on it to their
hearts’ content. They had had a harder job than anticipated, for the
old finish on the car, while stained and rubbed, cracked and flaked,
was as hard as baked enamel when it came to removing it; and they had
been assured that it would be necessary to remove it before applying
new paint. They had worked most of four afternoons with patent paint
removers and sand paper before the task had been accomplished. Even
then the corners and under surfaces hardly bore critical examination.
But the new paint seemed to take very well and the first coat, while a
bit thin and streaky in places, had worked a wonderful change in the
appearance of the body. The second coat was going on now, and after
that had dried there would be two coats of varnish.

Downstairs the chassis of the car stood dismantled, with parts
distributed all over the floor. To Tom and Willard it looked a most
forlorn and discouraging scene. It was terribly hard to convince
themselves that Jimmy would ever succeed in getting all those gears and
rods and bolts and wheels and things back in their proper places again!
Just now the work was lagging because the factory had not sent the
parts ordered.

“When we get this coat on we can’t do any more for a while, can we?”
asked Willard hopefully, dipping his brush again with a sigh and
returning to his labor.

“N-no, I guess not. Mustn’t forget the hood, though. We’ve got the
second coat to put on that yet.” Tom glanced over his shoulder to where
the object mentioned stood on end like a letter W. Willard painted in
silence after a discouraged glance at the hood. The noon whistle at the
paper mill suddenly burst into a hoarse bellow and Willard sighed again
and scowled at the paint pot. Finally:

“Tom, I’ll keep on until the body’s done, but I’m not going to do any
more painting after that,” he stated decidedly. “This is Saturday and
we ought to have a half-holiday.”

“All right,” said Tom. “You stop whenever you want to. I’ll do the hood
after dinner. It won’t take long.”

“No, you’ve got to stop, too. If I go off and leave you up here in the
heat and the flies I’ll feel like I ought to come back and help you. So
you’ve got to take a holiday, too. I’ll stop around for you at two and
we’ll go and see the game.”

“What game?” asked Tom disinterestedly.

Willard observed him pityingly. “The game of baseball, Tom. Between
Audelsville High School and Providence Preparatory Academy. Played on
the Meadow Street Field at three o’clock. Baseball, Tom, is a game
played with bat and ball. And the Audelsville High School is――er――an
institution of learning in the town of Audelsville, Rhode Island. Ever
hear of it?”

“You’re an idiot,” laughed Tom. “I’d forgotten we played Providence
Prep to-day.”

“Of course you had. You’ve forgotten everything except this――this
tiresome old automobile!” And Willard slapped at the body viciously
with his brush. “Do you know, Tom, you don’t talk anything but motors
nowadays? Sometimes I think that if you say just one more word about
differentials or――or gears or any of those things I’ll put my head back
and howl!”

“Bad as that, is it?” asked Tom with a smile.

“Worse! That’s why you’ve got to knock off this afternoon and get your
mind off the thing. Why, the first thing you know you’ll have brain
fever or automobilitis!”

“More likely painter’s colic,” suggested Tom.

“Something, anyhow. So you’ve got to come to the game. And if you say
one single word about automobiles all the afternoon I’ll――I’ll beat
you!”

“All right, I’ll come then,” Tom laughed. “Not that I’m afraid of a
little runt like you, though.”

“You aren’t, eh?” asked Willard, scowling threateningly.

“Not a bit.” Tom painted calmly. “How much have you got to do?”

“Not much. I’m almost at the bottom. Are you going to have the――the
running gear the same shade?”

“Yes. I thought first we’d have it lighter, but I guess it will look
just as well to have the body and the chassis the same tone. Do you?”

“Sure; more toney!” The boys painted for a while in silence. Then:
“When are we going to get those things from the factory?” Willard
asked. Tom shook his head.

“I don’t know. Jimmy wrote to them again yesterday. He says that if
they don’t send the parts soon he will go and get them.”

“Fine!” laughed Willard. “The factory’s in Detroit, isn’t it?”

“Yes. I wish they’d come, though. I’d like to have the car all ready
when school closes, wouldn’t you? How long do you suppose it will take
me to learn to run it, Will?”

“Jimmy said he could teach you in two days,” replied Willard
doubtfully. “But if I was learning I’d want about two months!”

“Automobiles are awfully interesting things,” said Tom thoughtfully.
“I’ve learned a lot about them, Will.”

“I should think you might! You’ve been out here with Jimmy every
evening since he started to wreck the car for us. Between that old book
of yours and the questions you’ve asked I should think you’d be able
to build an auto yourself!”

“Jimmy knows a lot about machinery, and he’s been dandy about telling
me things I wanted to know. When he assembles the engine again I’m to
help him, Will.”

“Well, I guess he will need help,” said Willard. “For my part I don’t
believe you’ll ever get it together again. There, that’s the last. My,
but I’m tired. Painting certainly makes your arm ache.”

“You bet it does. Who is going to pitch this afternoon, Will?”

“Chester, they say. I suppose there’s no use being captain if you can’t
do what you want, but we’d stand a heap better show of winning if he’d
let Billy Younger pitch. Chester hasn’t a thing but a fast ball and a
sort of a slow drop that only works about once in ten times.”

“Billy’s the best pitcher we’ve had since I can remember,” said Tom.
“I’m glad we’ll have him again next year.” Tom gave a final pat with
his brush, dropped it into the paint pot and sighed. “That’s all done.
How does it look?”

The boys drew back and observed their handiwork critically.

“Sort of thin in places, isn’t it?” asked Willard. “Under the front
seat there――――”

“The varnish will bring that out all right. I wonder if varnish is
harder to put on than paint.”

“I hope not!” Willard groaned. “If I could afford it, Tom, I’d hire a
painter to do the rest of the job.”

Tom laughed. “Oh, you’ll feel better by Monday. Let’s go and wash up.
Will you have some dinner with me?”

“No, I told mother I’d surely be home. Why don’t you come over and eat
with me? Then we’ll be all ready to start for the field.”

“I’ll ask if I may,” answered Tom, as they clattered down the steep
stairway to the carriage house below. “Sure your mother won’t mind?”

“Not a bit. She’ll be glad to have you. Isn’t this enough to turn you
gray?” And Willard paused at the carriage house door and viewed the
confusion dejectedly. “Two weeks ago we had a perfectly good car, Tom,
and now look at it! You needn’t tell me that Jimmy or anyone else knows
how to put all those things together again!”

“Of course he does. Why, I could pretty nearly do it myself! Of course
I’d have to study it out a bit――――”

“My, but you’re getting a swelled head, Tom! You’ll be telling me
pretty soon that you invented automobiles!”

Ten minutes later the boys were walking along Washington Street to
Willard’s house. One of Connors’ hacks rolled by on the way to the
hotel and Willard, looking after it, shook his head pityingly.

“There won’t be much for them to do, Tom, when we get The Ark moving,
eh?” Willard had dubbed the automobile The Ark in a facetious moment,
and, although Tom had protested, the name had stuck. Tom smiled.

“What I’m afraid of,” he replied, “is that Connors will go and put on
an automobile himself. He could, you know.”

“Maybe he could, but he won’t. Livery men hate the things like poison.
I wonder if he will try to make trouble for us, Tom.”

“Connors? I don’t see how he could,” Tom objected. “We have a perfect
right to run an automobile if we want to.”

