“Y-yes, but Connors isn’t the sort of man to sit down and twiddle his
thumbs if he sees anyone getting business away from him. Dad was saying
the other day that Connors wouldn’t like it much, and was telling how
he had driven two or three other livery men out of business here.”

“Well, I don’t see how he could drive us out of business, Will,”
replied Tom as they entered the Morris gate. “Gee, something smells
mighty good! And I’m as hungry as a bear!”

“Indian pudding,” replied Willard laconically, as they passed into the
house. “It’s Saturday.”

At half-past two the boys started out for the high school athletic
field, which lay between Meadow Street and the railroad, west of town.
Their way led them along Main Street for a half mile and then across a
sun-smitten field abloom with daisies and buttercups, and so to Meadow
Street and the entrance to the ball grounds. They had long since ceased
to be alone, and by the time they were getting out their quarters to
pay for admissions they were with a group of a half-dozen merry youths
in holiday mood. Jerry Lippit was of the number. Jerry was in baseball
togs, being a substitute infielder, carried a bat and had a fielder’s
glove dangling from his belt. He got into a game about twice in a
season, but he believed in being prepared!

The Providence team was having practice when Tom and Willard and
three or four others made their way to the “bleachers.” (There was a
first-rate grand stand, with backs to the benches and a roof overhead,
but seats thereon cost fifteen cents extra, and neither Tom nor
Willard was in the habit of occupying them.) It was pretty hot on the
bleachers, with the sun slanting down on your head, and Tom and Willard
followed the example of the boys already there and took off their
jackets. Jerry, who had stopped to remind Captain Chester Madden of
his existence and willingness to help the team in an emergency, joined
the group presently and sandwiched himself in between Tom and “Spider”
Wells.

“Is he going to let you play?” inquired Spider, who was a tall, thin
youth with mild blue eyes and a shock of corn-colored hair.

“When all the others are killed off,” replied Jerry cheerfully. “Say,
those chaps look pretty husky, don’t they?”

It was agreed that they did, and Teddy Thurston, who was seated behind
Willard, digging his sharp knees into that youth’s back, had an
admiring word for the natty gray uniforms and purple stockings of the
Providence team.

“They look like plums,” commented Jerry. “The Providence Plums! How’s
that for a name?”

“I hope we find them soft,” observed Tom.

“So do I. If we beat ’em I shall call them the Providence Prunes. There
goes Chester to warm up. Who’s he pitching to, Tom?”

“Poor, isn’t it? What’s the matter with letting Billy pitch?”

Jerry winked meaningly. “Ches wants some glory. They’ll bat him out of
the box in three innings; you see if they don’t.”

“Hope they do,” said Spider Wells, blinking almost vindicatively.
“Chester’s all the time trying to do things he can’t.”

“He can play third base,” said Willard. “I wish he’d stay there. I
suppose Tucker will play third. Look at the bunch of girls in the grand
stand, will you!”

“I pretty nearly got soaked for two grand stand seats,” said Teddy
Thurston. “My sister wanted to come, but she got a headache the last
time and I reminded mother of it and she said Bess couldn’t come. I’m
in fifty-five cents.”

“That’ll do for sodas when we get back,” suggested Jerry. “Any fellow
who will put up a game like that on his sister has to pay for it,
doesn’t he, fellows?”

It was the unanimous opinion of the crowd that he did, and Teddy,
after mentally figuring the expense, hesitatingly agreed. “Only,” he
bargained, “it’s to be straight soda, fellows; no ice-creams, you know!”

Jerry was for combating that ultimatum, but at the moment the
Audelsville team, in their gray and blue suits, took the field for
practice, and Jerry turned his attention to the home players.

“Who’s going to score?” asked Spider, taking a scorebook from his
pocket and tentatively wetting the tip of a pencil between his lips.
Spider was an indefatigable scorer, but as he was never able to quite
keep up with the plays it was necessary for his success that someone
else nearby should keep the score as well. Willard shook his head.

“I forgot to bring mine,” he said. Spider looked troubled until Teddy
Thurston brought forth a scorebook and borrowed a pencil from Tom. By
that time Audelsville had enjoyed her five minutes of fielding and
batting practice and Mr. Chase, the Assistant Principal, walked out to
the plate.

“Chase is going to umpire,” commented Willard. “That means we’ll get a
square deal.”

“So will the other fellows,” said Tom. “Now let’s see what they do to
Chester.”

The first one of the enemy was thrown out at first and the second
barely beat the ball out and was called safe. A sacrifice bunt placed
the runner on second base and, with two down, the local sympathizers
breathed more freely. But the next batsman, after waiting until Chester
Madden had put himself in a hole with three balls, found one to his
taste and wrapped a hot liner over second baseman’s head. Rightfielder
came in hard and threw to the plate, but the ball got there a fraction
of a second after the runner had crossed it in a cloud of dust, and
Providence had scored.

A pop fly to shortstop made the third out and the teams changed places.
Lyman, the diminutive shortstop, hit past the Providence pitcher and
reached first on second baseman’s error. But, although he got down to
second when Ness was put out at first, he died there, for both Cook
and Madden fanned. There was no more scoring by either team until
the fourth. Madden settled down and displayed a very fair article of
ball. He had but one strike-out to his credit, and most of the enemy
connected with his slants in one way or another, but a deal of sharp
fielding and a lot of good luck saved him until the first half of the
inning mentioned. Then things went bad from the start for the Blues’
captain.

The first purple-stockinged batsman took the first delivery, which was
a fast, straight ball, and sent it arching far out into centerfield.
Perhaps Cook should have got under it, but he didn’t, thus saving
himself from a possible error and allowing the runner to get safely to
second base. The next man laid the ball down about six feet in front
of the plate and both Madden and George Connors, the catcher, made for
it. Connors got it and hurled it down the base line. It was a hurried
throw and, instead of landing in Ness’s hands, the ball took the runner
squarely between the shoulders, sent him staggering over the bag and
then bounded off into the crowd at the foot of the grand stand. The
Providence coach hustled the astonished and breathless runner to his
feet and sent him sprinting to second, while the man on that bag raced
home.

Confusion ensued at once. Mr. Chase sent the first runner back to
third, as the ball had been interfered with, but allowed the batsman
to hold second. Captain Madden objected strongly, claiming that the
batsman should be allowed but one base. The Providence captain rushed
up and added his voice to the controversy and players of both teams
crowded around. Whereupon the purple-stockinged youth on third base
nonchalantly walked home and the runner on second ambled to third
and would have followed his team-mate’s example had not Jerry Lippit
shrieked a warning to Madden, who held the ball.

“You’re on third!” cried Madden, pointing accusingly at the runner who,
having crossed the plate, had now joined the group. “Mr. Umpire, send
him back to third, sir!”

“I can’t do that, Madden,” replied Mr. Chase quietly. “Time has not
been called.”

“It hasn’t?” ejaculated Madden, aghast.

“Certainly not. You didn’t ask for time.”

Murmurs of resentment arose from the Audelsville players, while the
visitors grinned or openly chuckled. Madden flushed angrily.

“Seems to me it was your business to call time, sir,” he said.

“Not at all. You rushed up and protested my decision. You had no right
to do that, Madden. If you had wanted time called you should have said
so. The runner is safe at the plate. That man is safe on third. Play
ball!”

Audelsville howled its disapproval from the stands, but Mr. Chase was
not to be shaken from his position, and after a few minutes of further
argument and protest the game continued. But now Captain Madden was “up
in the air” with a vengeance. The next man took his base on balls and
stole second immediately, Connors being afraid to throw down to head
him off. The subsequent batsman took kindly to Madden’s third delivery
and hit safely between shortstop and third, and two more runs came
across.

Dissatisfaction reigned on the bleachers. “Why doesn’t he start Billy
warming up?” demanded Spider Wells. “He’s losing the game for us.”

“He’s mad,” chuckled Teddy Thurston. “He isn’t thinking a thing about
Billy or anyone else just now. Watch this big chap smash a homer!”

The big chap didn’t accomplish that feat, but he had no trouble with
one of Chester Madden’s slow balls and sent it whizzing into short
left, a clean hit. With men on first and second and none out, things
looked bad for the home team. Connors walked down and talked with
Madden, and the latter nodded. Billy Younger arose from the players’
bench and began to warm up to Poor. The spectators murmured their
relief.

Madden made four attempts to catch the man off at second and then
turned his attention to the impatient batsman. The man happened to be
the opposing pitcher and a poor hand with the stick. But in spite of
that Madden seemed unable to put the ball over the plate to Mr. Chase’s
satisfaction and the Providence pitcher ambled to first, advancing the
other runners and filling the bases. Cries of “Take him out!” “Put in
Younger!” arose, demands which increased the captain’s unsteadiness.
Certainly Billy Younger had not had time to get the kinks out of his
