arm, yet even so it would doubtless have been well to substitute
him for Madden just then. For the next batsman, one of the Purple’s
heaviest hitters, rapped a sharp one down the third base line that was
just out of Tucker’s reach and two more runs came in. Connors took
affairs in his own hands then, and talked earnestly to Madden, with
the result that the captain, shrugging his shoulders, dropped the ball
in the box and went over to third base, displacing Tucker, and Billy
Younger, pulling off his faded blue sweater, ran on to the field. The
stands applauded loudly and Billy, rescuing the ball, pulled his cap
down and faced the situation.




                              CHAPTER VII

                          JERRY TO THE RESCUE


Billy was a rather stocky boy of sixteen, with a cheerful countenance
and a pair of steady gray eyes. He was a junior in high school and
had played on the team for two years. Enthusiastic admirers of Billy
declared that he had “everything there was,” meaning by that that he
was master of all the deliveries known to the science of pitching. This
was more enthusiastic than truthful, but still it was a fact that Billy
was a good deal of a pitcher for a boy of his age, and could cause the
ball to “break” in a number of puzzling ways. First of all, though,
it was Billy’s craft and coolness that made him great. Billy studied
the batsman and seemed to divine his thoughts. And after that he set
himself craftily to circumventing him. Billy’s delivery was slow, but
his curves broke well, and it was a recognized fact among his admirers
that the more deliberate Billy became the more likely he was to add
further strike-outs to his credit.

Billy was extremely deliberate now. He viewed the batsman as though
that youth’s features were strangely familiar to him and he was
wondering whether they had ever met and whether it would not be well
for him to walk up and shake hands. The batsman pawed the earth and
waved his bat impatiently. The Providence coachers jeered and the
bleacherites laughed appreciatively. Then, apparently deciding that
he did not know the batsman after all, Billy Younger lifted his arms
languidly above his head, spun half around and sent the ball slowly and
exactly over the center of the plate. The batsman watched it go by and
then turned inquiringly to the umpire.

“Strike!” said Mr. Chase.

The batsman tapped the plate and smiled contemptuously. Billy wound up
again, stepped easily forward and sped the ball. It looked good until
it was almost within reach of the impatient bat. Then it drifted lazily
out of the straight and narrow path and the bat swung harmlessly over
it. And George Connors, dropping to one knee, picked the ball almost
out of the dirt! After that Billy wasted two, a high one outside and a
low one that nicked the corner of the plate. By that time the coachers
and the players on the visitors’ bench were howling encouragement to
the batter and aspersions on the pitcher’s offerings.

“He hasn’t got a thing, Gus! Pick out a good one! Make him pitch to
you! He’s dead easy, Gus, old boy! This is the one!”

It was. It was a nice slow drop that never pretended at any moment
during its flight to be anything but a drop. And the batsman knew it
was a drop and was ready for it. And after he had swung he took two
full steps in the direction of first base before it dawned on him that
there are drops and drops, and that that particular drop had held a
drop too much! He retired to the bench scowling while Audelsville in
the grand stand clapped with well-behaved enthusiasm, and Audelsville
on the bleachers stamped and howled in abandoned glee.

“One down!” bawled the coachers to the runners.

“One gone!” called Madden from third.

The next batsman managed to connect with Billy’s second offering and
popped a high fly to leftfielder, going out without advancing the
runners. The Providence captain was the next victim to Billy’s slants
and turned away in disgust after watching just four deliveries float by
him. Audelsville heaved a vast sigh of relief and applauded as Billy
Younger trotted back to the bench.

“That’s all well enough,” grunted Willard, “but they’ve got six mighty
big tallies on that scorebook. We’ve got to do some hitting to get this
game, fellows!”

The rest agreed, all except Spider and Teddy, who were arguing heatedly
over the question of how to score that second run. Spider declared that
the runner should be credited with a steal, while Teddy insisted that
it was somebody’s error, he didn’t know whose!

“If it was anybody’s error,” said Jerry, “it was Chester’s. The big
boob ought to have asked for time.”

“The man stole on catcher,” suggested Tom. “Wasn’t it catcher’s error?”

“No, because pitcher held the ball,” contradicted Willard. “It’s
plainly Chester’s error.”

“It was everybody’s error, I guess,” murmured Teddy, scowling at his
scorebook. “Guess I’ll present everyone with one-ninth of an error!”

Meanwhile high school was falling before the clever curves of the
opposing pitcher, and, although the home team managed to get a runner
as far as second, there was no scoring in the last of the fourth. Nor
was there any scoring in either half of the fifth or sixth. The game
settled down to a pitchers’ battle, with the honors pretty evenly
divided between Billy and the purple-stockinged youth. Then, in the
last of the seventh, things began to look up for Audelsville. Berger,
rightfielder and a mediocre batsman, was hit on the arm and went down
to first rubbing his elbow and grinning. The incident unsteadied
the Providence pitcher for a moment, and Connors, who usually fanned
out expeditiously, somehow managed to get his bat in the way of the
ball and sent a slow bunt toward third. A mix-up ensued between third
baseman and pitcher, and Connors was safe on first and Berger was
hopping gleefully around at second. Billy Younger was an erratic
performer with the stick and his retirement was already discounted
when he faced the pitcher. But luck was with Billy to-day and he swung
against the first delivery and cracked it out over second baseman’s
head for a long roller that sent Berger across the plate and left
Connors on second. The bleachers howled approval and the High School
coachers danced and cavorted and uttered weird noises at first and
second. Lyman, head of the batting list, might be expected to bring in
another run, and he received evidences of distinguished consideration
as he stepped to the plate and faced the pitcher determinedly. But for
once the clever little shortstop proved a distinct disappointment,
for the best he could do, after watching two strikes go past him and
then fouling off two deliveries, was to send a weak grounder to third
baseman, who hurled to second in time to catch Billy. Second completed
the double. Meanwhile Connors had reached third, however, and there was
still a chance of another run. Ness, first baseman, long and lank and
a mighty swatter, came up and was passed to first. Cook, centerfielder,
while not as dependable as Ness, was a fair batter, and this time he
did his duty, banging a hot liner at shortstop which that youth stopped
but could not field in time to prevent another score. With men on first
and second Chester Madden fell a victim to the pitcher’s wiles and sent
an arching fly into centerfielder’s hands, and the inning was over.

In their half of the eighth the Providence players squeezed in another
tally, although Billy added one more strike-out to his growing score.
High School started badly, Jordan and Jones each being thrown out at
first. Berger, however, managed to do some heady waiting and got his
base on balls. Connor connected with a low ball and popped it up into
short centerfield. Shortstop went back for it and centerfielder raced
in for it. Even second baseman showed a disposition to take a hand in
the catching of that fly. The result was that it fell to the turf while
the three players stood and glared at each other. It was Billy’s turn
at bat again, and it was a foregone conclusion that, having had one
streak of luck, Billy couldn’t expect another and would prove an easy
out. But the pitcher, worried by the misadventure that had left two on
bases instead of retiring the side, went suddenly wild. Billy used his
head and waited. One ball, two balls, a strike, three balls――Billy
waved his bat and danced at the plate. Another strike!

“He can’t do it again, Billy!” called Chester Madden.

And he didn’t. What was meant for a strike slanted erratically past
Billy’s chin and Billy trotted to first, and the bases were full!

“Oh, for a home run!” sighed Tom, squirming excitedly about on the hot
seat. “Who’s up, Will?”

“Lyman,” replied Spider promptly. “He didn’t do a thing last time.”

“Gives him a better show now,” said Teddy hopefully. “Even a little old
hit would bring in two runs.”

Lyman was cautious. The pitcher, who had seemingly recovered from
his momentary unsteadiness, worked a slow drop and scored a strike.
He followed that with a fast high ball that Lyman refused, and Mr.
Chase confirmed his decision. Another delivery went as a ball by a
narrow margin. Then one shot by right in the groove and although Lyman
swung desperately he missed it. The next one went hurtling off with a
loud crack, but proved to be a foul outside of third base line. But
the following delivery found Lyman ready, and Lyman’s bat, too, and
away screeched the ball between second and third and Lyman sped for
the base. The Providence shortstop made a frenzied leap into the air
and possibly just touched the ball with his finger tips. But it was
not for him. Center and leftfielder ran in for it, and centerfielder
got it on a lucky bound. By that time Berger had scored, Connors was
rounding third, Billy was half-way between that bag and second, and
Lyman was still on the go. One fatal moment of indecision on the part
of centerfielder worked for high school. Seeing that he could not stop
Connors, the fielder sped the ball to second to get Lyman. At third
Chester Madden was on the coacher’s line. Just as the ball reached
second baseman, too late to put out Lyman, Billy Younger raced to
third. Chester, studying the situation rapidly, took a desperate chance
and waved Billy on toward the plate! There were two out, anyway, and it
was a time for risking something!

Billy was fleet of foot and he had hardly broken his stride at the
third corner, and now he was putting out for the plate for all he
was worth, while the Providence catcher, astride the rubber, shouted
imploringly for the ball. Across the diamond the second baseman,
recovering after an unsuccessful sweep at Lyman, who had slid safely to
the bag, saw what was happening and, in a panic, heaved the ball home.
It was a hurried throw and it came in far to the right of the plate,
striking the dust ten feet away and bounding into the catcher’s hands
by the merest good luck instead of going on to the backstop. But the
good luck wasn’t good enough, for, although the catcher threw himself
heroically toward the plate, Billy was there before him by a hair’s
breadth, and as the two rolled over together in the dust the umpire
