spread his hands wide, palms downward. When the catcher had struggled
to his feet again, Lyman was seated on third base, panting but content,
and the score stood five to seven.

Lyman deserved a run for his trouble, but he didn’t score it, for Ness
was out, shortstop to first baseman, and the eighth inning had passed
into history. The stands settled themselves again after several minutes
of wild excitement and the teams changed places. It was getting toward
five o’clock and the air was cooling perceptibly. Billy Younger went
back to the mound, but his wild streak around the bases had told on him
and he was decidedly wobbly. He passed the first batsman, struck out
the second and allowed the third a clean base hit. Then the fourth man
popped a foul to first baseman and Billy settled down. A scratch hit
past second left men on first, second and third bases, and for a moment
it looked as if the visitors might add to their score. But the best the
next purple-stockinged youth could do was to smash a ball straight at
Captain Madden, who didn’t have to move an inch to get it, and the side
was out.

It was high school’s last chance now and the bleachers arose as one
man and implored victory. Cook was the first man up. Cook swung his
bat grimly as he faced the enemy and then proceeded to raise and lower
the hopes of his team-mates and friends by knocking fouls all over
the place, going after everything that was offered him. In the end he
struck out ingloriously, and Chester Madden took his place.

Chester looked grimly determined as he hitched his belt, rubbed one
hand in the dust and settled into position. But the very first ball
pitched proved his undoing, for, although it came straight along the
groove, it was a fast one and Chester swung a fraction too low. Up
went the ball, poised an instant against the blue of the afternoon sky
and then started to earth directly over the pitcher’s box. Pitcher,
catcher and first baseman all went for it and all claimed it, but the
captain called for the catcher to take it, and when it came down with
a final rush it settled into that player’s big mitt. That thud of
leather against leather sounded tragic indeed to the home team and its
supporters. In the grand stand the seats began to empty, although many
lingered along the edge of the field to see the final put-out.

This doubtful honor fell, apparently, to Jordan, who, although he
had played a rattling game at second, had not greatly distinguished
himself at the bat. When all is said and done, the one thing that makes
baseball the interesting game it is, is its quality of unexpectedness.
Here was the game all over but the shouting, the score 7 to 5 in
Providence Prep’s favor, and two men out in the last inning. They were
sliding the bats into the canvas bag in front of the visitors’ bench.
The occupants of the bleachers were donning their jackets and swarming
out on to the turf. And then, suddenly, like a bolt from the blue, came
a sharp crack of the bat and Jordan was racing to first! And the dirty,
white sphere was a gray streak against the green turf, the second
baseman was rolling over and over after an unsuccessful attempt to stop
the ball, and the rightfielder was scurrying in for it! And Jordan was
rounding first now and flying like a rabbit for second! Fielder got
the ball and threw, but the throw was hurried and shortstop had to
step a couple of paces off base to catch it, and before he could tag
the runner the latter was safe. How Audelsville shouted and howled!
How Chester Madden and the rest of the team danced about! Chester sped
Jones to the plate, but the Providence pitcher refused to be hurried.
He took plenty of time to let his team-mates settle down again, and
then he faced the batsman. Now Jones, like Jordan, had failed to
produce hits so far, and the wise ones criticized Chester for not
putting in a pinch hitter. But Chester was banking on Fortune just
then, and Fortune didn’t fail him. Jones never had a chance to try at
the ball. The Providence pitcher was as wild as a hawk. The first two
deliveries went past Jones’ nose, the third bit the dust in front of
the plate and narrowly escaped being a passed ball, and the fourth went
wide of the plate. And Jones trotted to first, and the uproar, which
had continued unceasingly since Jordan’s hit, took on new volume.

But it wouldn’t do to put all the work on Fortune, and Chester realized
it. The next man on the list, Berger, was the weakest sort of a
batsman. It wouldn’t do to trust to Berger to bring in the two runs
needed to tie the game. So he waved that youth aside and looked about
him. Here were Poor and Tucker, but they weren’t likely to perform much
better than Berger.

“Where’s Lippit?” demanded Chester of the team at large.

No one seemed to know, and so everyone began to yell at once for
“Jerry! Jerry Lippit!” An answer came from back of third and Jerry
raced across the diamond. Chester seized him by the arm, whispered
instructions, and pushed him toward the plate. The uproar died away.
The crowd watched almost breathlessly. At second, Jordan pawed the
earth and shouted. At first, Jones danced about and uttered taunts,
keeping, nevertheless, a sharp watch on the boxman, who had a way of
turning with disconcerting quickness and throwing to first. But when
first baseman left the bag Jones took a twelve foot lead and redoubled
his antics. Behind him was Chester, coaching. Over by third stood
Lyman. The voices of the two crossed the diamond like pistol volleys,
crashing by the ears of the opposing pitcher, who, in spite of his
efforts to keep cool, was plainly worried. The first ball proved it,
for it struck the plate; and the enemy howled with mingled glee and
derision. Catcher walked down the alley a few steps before he tossed
the ball back. Pitcher nodded, hitched at his belt, rubbed a hand in
the earth, and poised himself again. The catcher gave his signal, the
ball sped to the plate, catcher caught it and almost with one movement
sent it streaking to second. Jordan was a good fifteen feet away at the
instant. He made one step toward second, saw the futility of it, and
then, turning, dug out for third. A groan went up from the watchers.
Shortstop, who had taken the throw-down, started along the path after
the runner, then, pausing, snapped the ball to third baseman. Jordan,
headed off, doubled back. Third closed in a few steps and then threw to
second baseman, who was now covering the sack. Again Jordan turned,
but they were closing in on him fast and it seemed that the end had
come. But Fortune once more took a hand. Second baseman tossed the ball
to pitcher, who had run over to back up third baseman. The throw was
an easy one, over Jordan’s head, but it went high, and, although the
pitcher got it in one hand, it was at that moment that Jordan, grown
desperate, rushed for the third bag. Pitcher was on the base line and
Jordan struck him full in the breast with his shoulder. Down swept the
hand with the ball, as the pitcher staggered aside, and thumped against
Jordan’s back. Tom, watching from twenty feet away, groaned. Then, in
the next instant, he was dancing like a dervish and whacking Willard on
the back! For the ball was rolling in the dust and Jordan was clutching
third base frantically! Pitcher had dropped the ball! And on second
base sat Jones!

Well, anyone could guess what would likely happen after that. With two
balls already wasted, the pitcher tried to do what was wise; that is,
pass the pinch hitter and wait for the next batsman. And so, while
Audelsville howled and cheered and hooted, he tossed another wide ball.
Then Jerry saw what he was up to, saw his chance to make a hero of
himself being snatched from his grasp, and was enraged.

“Oh, put one over!” he taunted. “You don’t dare to give me a chance
at one!” He leaped to the end of the batter’s box and waved his bat
exasperatingly at the troubled pitcher. “You’re afraid, you Providence
Prune!”

Now whether the pitcher meant to sneak a strike over or whether he
meant the next delivery to be a ball will never be known, but Jerry
will tell you that no one could ask for a better offering than came
to him. It sped in fairly high, broke slowly and came straight over
the plate. To have refused it would have been a positive crime, Jerry
declared afterwards. So he didn’t refuse it. He swung sharply, met it
fairly and squarely and sent it whizzing high and far into rightfield.

All eyes followed it and hearts began to sink. Out there rightfielder,
turning, was running back slowly. He could catch it, certainly, and the
game would be over. Then, suddenly, the fielder scurried back further,
watching the descending ball over his shoulder. And then, just how it
happened wasn’t apparent, up went his right hand high in the air, he
toppled over backward, and the ball rolled away from him across the
grass! The tying runs had crossed the plate and Jerry was faltering at
second. Now he took up the running again. He was at third before the
fielder had recovered the ball and sped it to second baseman. Lyman
waved him toward home. Half-way there the ball left second baseman’s
hands and Jerry, with a final frantic charge, slid over ten feet of
dust and hooked one foot into the plate, avoiding the catcher’s wild
lunge of the ball and scoring the eighth and winning tally!

The high school scorer credited Jerry with a home run, on the
presumption that the ball had been an impossible one to handle. The
Providence scorer gave him a two-base hit and put an error down to
rightfielder. I fancy the latter story came nearer the truth of the
matter. Not that it mattered much, however, for Audelsville tramped
home in joyous triumph, Jerry became a hero, and Providence Preparatory
Academy retired with trailing banners and muttered vows of revenge.
So absorbed in the glorious ninth inning victory were Tom and Willard
and Spider that they reached town before it dawned on them that Teddy
Thurston had mysteriously disappeared and that they hadn’t got their
sodas!

“Never mind,” said Willard darkly, “we’ll make him pay up yet. That kid
will come to a bad end, you mark my words, fellows!”

Later, when Tom and Willard paused at a corner to say good night,
Willard volunteered:

“Say, Tom, you know something?”

“Not much,” laughed Tom. “What is it?”

“You haven’t said ‘automobile’ once all the afternoon!”




                             CHAPTER VIII

                       TOM LEARNS TO RUN THE ARK


On the following Tuesday morning the expressman backed up to the
Bentons’ and lowered two heavy wooden cases to the sidewalk,
subsequently trundling them up the short drive to the stable, and
that evening Jimmy Brennan began to reassemble the engine. Tom was
on hand, watching, helping where he might, and asking a hundred
questions. Jimmy, whom the boys had grown to like tremendously, was
patience itself. In fact, he seemed to like to share his knowledge with
Tom. Scarcely a part was assembled without Tom learning the why and
wherefore of it. Jimmy wasted good time often enough while he explained
and illustrated.

Jimmy had gained his knowledge of engines in a machine shop in
Providence, and of automobiles in an automobile factory in Springfield,
where he had worked two years. How he had managed to land in Audelsville
is best told in Jimmy’s own language. “You see,” he confided to Tom one
evening while he worked on the car, “after I’d been at the bench about a
year and a half I thought I’d sort of like to run one of the things. So
