I got ’em to shift me and I used to try the cars out after they were
built. Then one day they wanted a demonstrator――one of the chaps was
sick or something――and they took me. When the other chap came back again
they said I could keep on if I wanted to, and I did. Then, maybe it was
two or three months after that, I was showing a big ‘sixty’ to a man. I
had him out two or three times and, finally, he decided to buy the car.
Then he asked me would I come to Audelsville, where he lived, and be his
chauffeur. I mulled it over and finally I said I would. He offered good
big wages.”

“Who was he?” asked Tom.

“James U.,” replied Jimmy. “James U. Martin, to be sure.”

“Oh! And didn’t you like the work?”

“I did and I didn’t. I liked driving the car, but they wanted me to
wear a uniform. I’d have done that, too, I guess, but Mrs. Martin
and me, we――well, we didn’t hit it off very well. She said my hands
were always dirty――which they were, I guess, seeing as I was always
tinkering with the engine or something――and she didn’t like the color
of my hair. She said red hair wasn’t genteel for a chauffeur. I said
I wasn’t goin’ to change the color of my hair for nobody, and so I
quit. James U. offered me a job in the mill, but I didn’t take it. Went
to work for Gerrish and Hanford instead. Some day, likely, I’ll pull
up and go back to the automobile factory. So that’s how I came to be
living in this old burg.”

“Don’t you like Audelsville?” asked Tom in surprise.

“Oh, it’s good enough, I guess. Now, then, where’s that box of cotter
pins?”

Class Day at the high school came on the twentieth that year, and for
a week before it Willard, who was graduating, wasn’t able to give much
time to the car. Tom managed to get one coat of varnish on unaided
and did several small tasks about the tonneau. The leather cushions
needed attention, for one thing, and after Tom had gone over them with
tacks and replaced two or three missing buttons he dressed them with
an evil-smelling concoction that Jimmy mixed for him. After that they
really looked almost like new. A piece of carpet, discovered in the
attic, was fitted on the tonneau floor and a rubber mat was secured
from an automobile supply house in Providence for the front of the car.
Meanwhile Jimmy had nearly finished his work, and Tom’s knowledge of
gas engines had wonderfully increased. The wiring was put in new from
batteries to cylinders, and Jimmy dissected the magneto and found it
satisfactory.

Tom attended the graduation exercises and heard Willard deliver an
allegedly humorous speech in his office of Class Prophet. Also he went
to the graduation ball and forgot The Ark long enough to dance with
Willard’s sister Grace and Teddy’s sister Bess――unlike baseball games,
dances, it seemed, did not cause Miss Thurston headaches!――and several
other fellows’ sisters or cousins, and to eat an unbelievable quantity
of salad and ices. Willard went on a visit to Wickford for three days
after graduating, and finally turned up one Monday forenoon ready to go
to work again on the automobile. He had not been near it for a week,
and when he saw it he stared hard. Body and chassis had been joined
again, and it was a very brave looking car that confronted him in the
middle of the carriage room floor. Jimmy had taken a hand at painting
the running gear, and, now, all that remained was a second coat of
varnish on the body and two coats below.

“Say, Tom, that’s some car!” ejaculated Willard. “Why――why, she’s a
peach, isn’t she?”

Tom agreed that she was. “And you ought to hear her run,” he said
proudly. “Why, out on the sidewalk you’d hardly know she was here.
Jimmy says she isn’t terribly quiet, but I don’t think she makes any
more noise than that big car of Mr. Martin’s! Want me to start her for
you so’s you can hear her?”

“Do you know how?” asked Willard hesitatingly, moving away.

“Of course,” replied Tom, with a fine air of nonchalance. “It’s easy
enough.”

So he turned the switch on to the battery, pulled down the throttle
lever and tugged at the crank. There was a noise, but it wasn’t the
sound of the engine running.

“Is she going?” asked Willard awedly.

“No,” panted Tom, “not yet. I guess she’s cold.” He gave the handle
another half-dozen turns without result.

[Illustration: “He gave the handle another half-dozen turns without
result”]

“Cold!” said Willard. “Gee, that’s more than I am and more than you
look!”

Tom scowled at the car. “Something must be wrong,” he muttered,
fiddling with the spark and throttle and then swinging the switch on
and off knowingly. “I’ll try her again.”

He did, while Willard backed further away, and for some unknown reason
the engine sputtered once or twice and then settled down into a steady,
rhythmic song. Tom, wiping the perspiration from his forehead, smiled
triumphantly across at his chum. Willard gathered courage and drew near.

“Why doesn’t it go?” he demanded.

“Go? It is going!”

“I mean move――run――――”

“Because the clutch isn’t in,” explained Tom. “The engine is running
idle; there’s no load on it; see? If I pushed down on this thing and
drew this lever toward me it would start and go right through the back
of the stable, I guess!”

Willard begged him nervously to take his hand away from the lever in
question. “I don’t think,” he said――they were almost shouting to make
each other hear――“that it makes much noise, Tom!”

“Of course it doesn’t!” bawled Tom emphatically. “You see, Jimmy’s so
used to――to high-priced cars that he doesn’t appreciate this one.”

“How much more is there to do?” asked Willard.

“Just varnish her and put a new tube in that shoe over there. Jimmy
says the rest of the tires will last for months, maybe. He says,
though, we’d ought to have an extra tire on hand. There’s a place at
the back where you can strap it on. Then we’d be prepared in case we
had a blow-out. I’ve made a list of things we ought to have, Will.
There――there are a good many of them.”

“I suppose so,” Willard agreed. “And we mustn’t forget that we’ve got
to make another payment to Saunders in a few days. I sort of thought
we’d have the car going and be earning some money before we had to pay
him any more.”

“We would have if they hadn’t held us up at the factory for those new
parts. Anyway, we’ll have her on the street in two or three days now;
that is, if we can get the varnish on.”

So they set bravely to work with varnish pots and brushes and, by
keeping at it until dinner time and then putting in another three hours
in the afternoon, they completed the body and got the first coat on
the chassis. Three days later the car was ready and Tom took his first
lesson in running it. Jimmy took the wheel until they had reached a
nice stretch of open road some two miles from town in the direction of
Graywich and then he mounted the running board on the driving side and
put Tom through his paces. Willard went along, seated in the tonneau,
and showed signs of nervousness when Tom moved over to the driver’s
seat and took the wheel.

Jimmy showed Tom how to throw out the clutch with his left foot and
pull the lever back to first speed and they went trundling slowly and
cautiously down the road, Tom holding the wheel desperately and staring
fixedly ahead. Presently――after Tom had wobbled the car from one side
of the road to the other for several hundred feet――Jimmy said:

“All right. Now when we get to that next telegraph pole, Tom, stop her!”

Tom took his eyes off the road ahead long enough to glance at the pole
in question and the car headed promptly toward the stone wall, and
Willard set up a howl. The Ark was brought back into the path, and Tom,
frowning terrifically, released his clutch, threw forward the lever
and jammed down on his foot brake. The car came to a sudden stop some
fifteen feet short of the post.

“Don’t be so sharp with your brake,” advised Jimmy. “All right. Now
start her forward again and stop right at the post.”

This time Tom made a simply superb stop.

“Good. Now back her,” directed Jimmy.

Tom looked vacantly at the levers, forgot to release his clutch and
made a horrible noise by trying to throw the lever into the reverse. At
last, however, the car began going backward, Willard leaning fearsomely
out and shouting constant warnings, and Tom toiling mightily at the
wheel. Then Jimmy ordered him to stop and start ahead again. A hundred
yards further on Jimmy said suddenly,

“Stop her quick!”

Tom jammed on the foot brake, forgetting to release his clutch again.

“Clutch!” bawled Jimmy. “Stop her!”

Tom, perspiring freely now, got his left foot at work and the car
stopped.

“Don’t put your foot brake on hard,” advised Jimmy, “without releasing
your clutch. You wear it out if you do. Now when I say stop her quick
I mean _quick_. See? What’s the quickest way to stop her?”

Tom’s wandering, puzzled gaze fell on the emergency brake. He seized
it. “This!” he exclaimed triumphantly.

Jimmy nodded approvingly. “Right-o! Remember that quick means that,
then. Let her go again.” After they were started: “Now put her into
second,” said Jimmy. “Forward, across and forward again.”

Tom made poor work of that shifting and he had to do it many times
until he could accomplish it with what was very nearly one motion.
But the most of that lesson was devoted to stopping and starting, and
