by the time the car was headed back toward Audelsville Tom was pretty
well worn out, but twice as enthusiastic as he had been before. Jimmy
allowed him to keep the wheel, the car running slowly on high speed,
almost into town, Jimmy himself managing the steering whenever they
met a vehicle, which was infrequently. Tom discovered that after a
while steering was something that almost did itself, that as he grew
accustomed to it he was able to keep the car in the road without any
especial effort.

Tom was so eager to finish his education that there was a second
lesson that evening after supper, and two more the next day. The only
mishap was when, the following morning, in trying to turn the car in
the road, Tom almost slammed the fenders into a fence. Now and then
Willard, who always went along, took the wheel for a few minutes and
received instructions, but Willard showed little talent for the work
and was distinctly nervous, and in the end it was decided that Tom
should attend to the running of the car. Willard, however, expressed
an intention of ultimately learning how. “You see,” he explained, “you
might get sick or something and somebody would have to run it.”

Occasionally they stopped while Jimmy lifted the hood and tinkered
with the engine; and once he made Tom put in a new set of spark plugs
by the roadside, a performance that occupied a full half-hour, and
left Tom very hot and dirty. Another day, some two miles from town,
Jimmy pretended that they had had a blow-out――which, luckily, they
hadn’t!――and made Tom unship the new tire from the rear of the car and
put it on a front wheel. That necessitated lifting the forward axle
with the jack, prying off an obstinate rim, and so, finally, removing
the old tire. Then a new tube was partly inflated with the pump――warm
work that!――sprinkled with talc powder and inserted in the new shoe,
and the whole set on the wheel, the clincher rim being hammered on
afterwards. Subsequently the pump was again brought into play and Tom’s
arms ached long before the tube was sufficiently inflated. Two days
later Jimmy decided that there was no use wearing out the new tube and
shoe as long as the old one was serviceable, and made Tom transfer them
again! This time, however, they were in the stable――no, garage!――and it
wasn’t quite so hard.

Another time――Jimmy had become so used to spending his evenings in
the Benton’s stable that he found it hard work to keep away――Jimmy
did something mysterious to the engine and then told Tom to start it.
But, although Tom turned and turned, and although Willard took his
place when he gave out, the engine refused to even cough, and Tom was
instructed to find the trouble. That was a problem! Jimmy lounged
around with his hands in his pockets and offered no comment, and even
refused advice when asked for it. It took Tom just forty minutes
to discover that Jimmy had detached the wires from the cylinders,
although they were dangling there uselessly in plain sight! Another
time, unseen of the boys, he shut the cock in the gasoline supply pipe
at the carburetor and again poor Tom nearly worried himself into a
spasm. It was all useful experience, however, and the boys enjoyed it
after it was over. By this time even Willard, whose talents scarcely
leaned toward mechanics, had got a very fair idea of the philosophy of
automobiles.

You may be certain that Tom’s mother meanwhile viewed the progress of
events with deep misgiving. Every day, as she said, she expected to
hear that Tom had either killed himself outright or been maimed for
life. Mrs. Benton was deeply suspicious of automobiles and nothing
could induce her for a very long time to approach The Ark nearer than
ten feet. At that distance she seemed to think that it could not reach
out, seize her and trample her underfoot! Even Tom’s father, who was
deeply interested in the car and the project, and who was frequently
on hand in the evenings, had his doubts. In those days there were
by actual count only nine automobiles in Audelsville, three of them
being light trucks belonging to the express company, and the others
large and expensive cars belonging to wealthy residents of The Hill.
Consequently Mr. Benton viewed the contrivances with more or less doubt
and suspicion. One evening, however, Tom and Willard combined their
eloquence and persuaded Mr. and Mrs. Benton to take a ride. Of course
Jimmy did the driving and, at the boys’ request, went at a snail’s pace
until they were well out of town. Mrs. Benton sat stiff and fearful at
first, but gradually her expression of nervous apprehension wore off
and she relaxed against the cushions――the car was one with a high back
to the tonneau after the obsolete but comfortable style of those of
some half-dozen years ago――and really began to enjoy the smooth ride
through the summer twilight. Mr. Benton’s uneasiness survived even a
shorter time, and when Tom took Jimmy’s place at the wheel he only said:

“That’s right, son; let’s see what you can do with it.”

Tom soon convinced him that, if he was not as skillful a chauffeur
as Jimmy Brennan, he was quite capable of handling the car, and Mr.
Benton was highly pleased. They went all the way to Graywich, or, at
least, to within sight of the town, and then sped back again with the
searchlights flooding the darkening road with a broad radiance.

“How did you like it, mother?” asked Tom as he helped her out at the
house.

Mrs. Benton smiled. “Very much, Tom,” she answered. “It made me feel
so much easier to know that if anything happened we’d all get killed
together!”

Another evening Willard’s parents and sister had their first ride in
the car. This time things did not run so smoothly, for a rear tire
which had been on the verge of collapse ever since they had bought the
car decided to give up. That necessitated a change by the side of the
road, under the light of one of the kerosene lamps, and the interesting
discovery was made that the jack had been left in the stable. Tom
explained shamefacedly that he had jacked up one of the wheels that
morning to study the working of the brake and had left the jack on the
floor.

“Then how are we going to raise that axle?” demanded Jimmy.

Tom couldn’t tell him, nor could Willard. Mr. Morris was on the point
of offering a solution of the problem when Jimmy winked at him and he
subsided.

“We might all get hold and lift the wheel,” said Tom, “and then one of
us could slip something under the axle. How would that do?”

“That’s all right this time,” replied Jimmy, “but supposing you were
out alone in the car? What would you do then?”

Tom studied again. At length: “I――I guess I’d walk home,” he
acknowledged. Then: “No, I wouldn’t either! I’d find a big rock or
something and a long pole――a fence rail would do――and make a lever!”

“Right-o!” commended Jimmy. “Then what’s the matter with doing that
now?”

It was done, after some hunting up and down the road in the darkness
for the necessary articles, and Tom made the change, Willard helping
him, in something short of twenty minutes, which was doing very well.
Jimmy decided that the old tube was well worth having vulcanized and
that even the shoe, as worn and battered as it was, could be repaired
to serve in an emergency.

So Tom learned by toil and experience, and finally Jimmy declared that
there was no reason why he shouldn’t take the car out alone. “Just
remember this, Tom, and you won’t be likely to get in much trouble.
When you don’t know what to do, _stop_! And stop quick! Then you can
think it out and take all the time you want. The trouble with lots of
folks is that they never learned to stop; they just learned to go; and
when there’s trouble they keep on going!”

The next morning Tom was up with the sun, or very nearly, and, after
dressing, stole noiselessly down the stairs, let himself out the back
door and unlocked the garage. Five minutes later he was steering the
car down Washington Street, his heart thumping a little harder than
usual. There weren’t many abroad at that hour. Washington Street, save
for the sparrows and a few cats and an occasional milkman making his
rounds, was quite deserted. Tom was glad of that, for being alone in
the car and not having Jimmy to depend on in a crisis was different!
But all went well and at the end of his own street he turned into
Linden Street and so to the Graywich road. There he let the car
out and settled back in his seat. It was wonderfully exhilarating,
riding through the fresh, moist morning air, and Tom’s heart kept
time with the hum of the busy engine, his doubt and nervousness fast
disappearing. It wasn’t as smooth going as when the car had been full,
for the springs were strongly built, and when the car found a bump――and
there were plenty of them――Tom jounced around a good deal like a tennis
ball on a racquet! He passed several cars and vehicles and had got
some three miles from Audelsville when the engine began missing and
sputtering. Tom frowned, slowed down and considered. Then, wisely,
he turned and headed toward home. The car sputtered worse than ever,
and when it came to a slight hill almost refused to take it. He tried
running on the low speed and thought that helped, but just over the top
of the hill the engine gave one final gasp and stopped!

Tom threw out his clutch lever, set his brake, and descended. There was
still a good hour before breakfast time, but he was fully two miles
and a half from home, and whatever was to be done had better be done
quickly. The trouble, however, was to find out what. He raised one
side of the hood and ran his eye over the engine. Everything seemed
all right there. The wires were all connected. He looked over the
carburetor side with similar results. The cock on the gasoline inlet
pipe was open, and everything else seemed satisfactory. So he tried to
start the engine again; tried first on the battery, and then on the
magneto, spinning the wheel valiantly, but with no results. The engine
seemed as dead as a door-nail! After that he went over everything
again. And, after that, he sat down on the running-board to wipe the
perspiration from his face and get his breath back, meanwhile trying to
remember what he had done in former similar quandaries. Finally, what
should have occurred to him long before came to him, and he dragged off
the front seat cushion and, unscrewing the cap of the gasoline tank,
peered in. It was as dry as a bone!

Luckily Jimmy had provided for just such a contingency by placing an
old one-gallon varnish can filled with gasoline under the rear seat,
and soon Tom was on his way again, and in another quarter of an hour
ran The Ark triumphantly into the garage, having learned one more thing
that would doubtless stand him in good stead.

Finally, three days later, to be exact, on the twelfth day of July, the
great moment arrived. The Benton & Morris Transportation Company began
business!




                              CHAPTER IX

                              “CAB, SIR?”


The company started with a cash balance of four dollars on hand. Jimmy
had been paid, although he had expressed his entire willingness to wait
