horses――――”

“They look scared already,” offered Teddy. “Do they ever look around?”

A guffaw from the driver of a smart looking runabout and grins from
others added fresh fuel to the Irishman’s wrath. “For two cents I’d get
down from this box and punch your heads,” he declared, “the whole bunch
o’ ye!”

Further hostilities were interrupted by the screech of the train down
the track. The boys moved across to the platform and Tom and Willard
walked around to the front of the station. The express came to a stop
with a grinding of brakes and the passengers began to disembark. There
were not so very many to-day, perhaps a score in all. Tom and Willard,
the former at the front end of the train and the latter at the rear,
were ready for them, however.

“Automobile to all parts of town!” announced Tom. “Ride up, sir?”

A man with a sample-case in each hand viewed Tom jovially but pushed by
and transferred his luggage to the hack-driver. Several others viewed
the boy good-naturedly but passed him by. An elderly lady, however, who
was probably a trifle hard of hearing, handed a small brown bag to Tom
and followed him around the station. But when she saw the automobile
she shook her head in alarm and seized her bag again. “Sakes alive, you
don’t expect me to trust my life in one of them things, do you, young
man? Aren’t there any carriages here?”

Tom conducted her to the surrey and helped her in, while the driver
grinned from the front seat. Meanwhile Willard had fared no better, and
the boys, standing on the platform, watched the horse-drawn vehicles
rattle away well filled.

“I guess it’s a sort of――of an innovation,” observed Willard. “I
suppose we’ll have to educate them up to riding in an auto.”

“How long’s it going to take to educate them?” asked Tom
disappointedly. Willard had no answer for that. Teddy and Jerry looked
properly sympathetic but were doubtless relieved to find that they
would not have to walk home.

“What you want, Tom, is a sign, a good big one,” said Jerry. “‘Any Part
of the City for a Quarter,’ or something like that. Folks don’t know
the thing’s public, you see.”

“I told them it was,” responded Tom bitterly. “I can’t very well knock
them down and throw them in, can I?”

Teddy dug his hand in his pocket and sidled up to Tom.

“Eh? What’s this?” asked Tom.

“The quarter,” replied Teddy. “I’m going to ride back, you know.”

Tom pushed the hand away with a smile. “That’s all right, Teddy, I
don’t want your money. Climb in, fellows!”

So The Ark trundled back to the village, completing its first, and
unsuccessful, trip.




                               CHAPTER X

                          THE FIRST PASSENGER


Discouragement didn’t last long, however. After they had dropped Jerry
and Teddy they turned back into Linden Street and stopped at a sign
painter’s. After some bargaining the proprietor agreed to paint them
a small cardboard sign for fifty cents and have it ready by half-past
one. “Any Part of the City, 25 Cents” was the legend decided on. Then
it was dinner time and Willard dropped out at his house and Tom took
The Ark back to Cross Street.

The sign was ready for them when they called for it, but it was still
pretty sticky. The painter looped a cord through it so they could hang
it from the car and they went off in high spirits to meet the 1:57.
They were confronted by something of a problem. If they secured any
passengers from that train and took them uptown they couldn’t possibly
get back in time to meet the 2:06.

“What we need,” said Willard with a laugh, “is another automobile.”

“Maybe,” Tom answered, “but I’m wondering whether we haven’t got one
too many as it is. If we can’t get folks to ride with us――――”

“Shucks! We’ll have all the business we can handle as soon as folks
find out about us.”

“Well, we won’t worry about the 2:06 train yet. I dare say we won’t get
anyone from the 1:57. If we don’t we can wait there for the other.”

As they reached the station early they had their choice of locations
along the platform and were nicely installed when Connors’ hack drove
up. But instead of taking a position in front or behind The Ark the
driver stopped alongside.

“Hey, you can’t stand there,” he announced truculently.

“Why can’t we?” asked Willard.

“Because that’s my place, that’s why.”

“There’s plenty of room ahead there,” answered Willard. “Help yourself.”

“Is that so? Smart, ain’t you? Get out o’ that now afore I has ye
arrested.”

Willard looked enquiringly at Tom, and the latter shook his head.
The Connors surrey drove up and the driver of it stopped to hear the
discussion. The hack driver appealed to him.

“Johnny, these fellers think they have a right to stand here. What’ll I
do with them?”

“Put ’em out,” was the laconic reply. The other viewed the automobile
doubtfully, evidently at a loss how to proceed. Finally he drove on,
tossed down his reins and entered the station. A moment later he
returned accompanied by the station agent. The latter came up to Tom
and Willard. He was a small man with weak eyes and a sandy mustache and
a nervous, querulous manner. He was evidently annoyed at being called
from his duties.

“You can’t have that thing here,” he announced hurriedly. “Connors, the
livery man, has the privilege for the station.”

“Do you mean that he owns the whole platform?” demanded Tom.

“I mean he’s the only one can stand here. You’re after passengers,
ain’t you?”

“Of course.”

“Well, you’ll have to keep away from the platform then unless you’ve
got permission from the railroad. So move on now!”

“How do we get permission?” asked Willard.

“I don’t know. Put in an application. Write to the Division
Superintendent in Providence. I don’t care what you do. I can’t stand
here all day. Move along, can’t you?”

“Connors doesn’t own the road, too, does he?” demanded Tom.

“He doesn’t own anything,” replied the agent exasperatedly. “But he
has the sole right to use this platform to get business. You can stand
anywhere you like, I guess, as long as you get out of here.”

“He ain’t got no right anywhere around here,” broke in the driver of
the hack. “He’s tryin’ to get our trade away, he is. You wait till I
tell Connors about it!”

“Oh, tell Connors and be blowed!” said Willard inelegantly. “Go on,
Tom, move her across to the other side of the road. I’ll find out if
Connors is the only one who can come near their old station.”

Tom started the car, went down to the freight house, turned around
and then took up a position across the dusty road, the rival drivers
looking on triumphantly. Meanwhile several private teams had appeared
and it was almost time for the train. The driver of the hack, whose
name, as they subsequently learned, was Pat Herron, still resented
their presence and kept up a conversation with the surrey driver loud
enough for the boys to hear.

“Who’d be after ridin’ in a thing like that, I’m askin’! Why, believe
me, Johnny, it’ll fall to pieces if you give it a kick.”

“I would but I’ve got a sore foot,” answered Johnny with a grin. “I
s’pose now that was the first one was ever built, Pat?”

“’Twas an experiment, Johnny. They made that just to see how they
shouldn’t do it, me boy. Look at the fine lines of it, will ye? ’Tis a
racy lookin’ contraption!”

“Oh, dry up!” muttered Tom. “There comes the train, Will. Come on.”
They hung the sign from a bracket as they got out, Connors’ men
guffawing at the sight of it, and walked over to the platform. It was
soon evident that Pat and Johnny were not satisfied with their victory,
for whenever the boys tried to secure a passenger for The Ark one or
another of the livery men was at hand to discourage the hesitating
customer.

“Sure, sir, you’ll be killed if you ride in his autymobul! ’Tain’t a
real car, sir. An’ look at what’s goin’ to drive ye, sir! Sure ’tis
certin death, sir!”

But in spite of it all Tom actually secured a passenger, a well-dressed,
middle-aged man who carried no luggage, and who seemed in a big hurry.

“All right, all right,” he said testily. “Where’s your car? I’m in a
rush. Get me to the paper mills as quick as you can.”

“Right across the road, sir,” directed Tom, searching the platform with
his eyes to see if Willard had been as fortunate. But Willard returned
alone and the three hurried across to the car. Tom slipped the sign
off, opened the tonneau door for the passenger and sprang to his seat.
Willard cranked up and in a moment they were off.

