Their passenger, sitting impatiently upright, frowned at his watch.
“Hurry it up now,” he said. “I’m late already. How far is it to the
mills?”

“Not far, sir,” replied Tom. “I’ll have you there in two minutes.”

“See that you do.” The passenger snapped his watch shut and leaned
back. The trip was a bumpy one and dusty, since their way led them up
River Street for a block and then to the right into the extension of
Meadow Street and thence into Railroad Avenue, a thoroughfare little
better than an alley and traversed principally by trucks.

“What sort of roads do you call these?” asked the passenger disgustedly
as he tossed around on the back seat.

“Pretty bad, sir,” replied Willard. “The best way is up through the
town, but you said you were in a hurry and so――――”

“Yes, yes! All right!”

Bumping and jouncing, her springs protesting loudly, The Ark skirted
the end of the railroad yards, turned at a sharp angle where the way
resembled a dump more than a road, and finally pulled up within a
hundred feet of the mills. It was impossible to get any nearer, but the
boys showed the passenger the gate through the high board fence and,
with a grunt of disgust, he leaped out, fumbling in his pocket.

“What’s the fare?” he demanded.

“Twenty-five cents, sir.”

“Twenty-five cents――twenty-five cents――Here’s a half a dollar; smallest
I’ve got.”

“I’m afraid――――” Tom looked at Willard enquiringly―――― “I’m afraid,
sir, I haven’t the change.”

“Didn’t ask for it,” replied the man over his shoulder. “Be back here
at three sharp. I want to get the accommodation to Eustis. Don’t
forget!”

Tom viewed the half-dollar radiantly. “I think we ought to keep this,
Will,” he said. “It’s the first money, you know.”

“All right,” laughed Willard. “Put it away. And now let’s go and make
some more. If we hurry we may get there in time for the 2:06.”

Tom jammed his lever in and they jolted recklessly back the way they
had come, Willard clutching the seat desperately to keep from being
tossed out. As Tom had very nearly kept his promise to reach the mill
in two minutes, they were able to return to the station before the
west-bound train, which was fortunately two or three minutes late, had
arrived. They might as well have spared themselves the trouble and
saved the gasoline that they consumed in making the trip, for, although
at least two dozen persons got off the 2:06, not one patronized the
Benton and Morris Transportation Company’s vehicle. The 2:06 was almost
the only train with which the trolley line made any sort of connection.
If the express came in on time or merely a minute or two late the
trolley car was there at the foot of River Street and, of course,
offered a cheap and speedy way of reaching the center of town. To-day
the car caught the bulk of the arrivals, while a few walked and some
eight or ten piled into Connors’ vehicles. Only The Ark failed to get
its share.

“I guess the trouble is,” said Willard when the station had settled
down to quiet again, “that they can’t see the auto.”

“That isn’t it,” replied Tom. “They’re so used to giving their luggage
and their checks to Connors’ drivers that they can’t get it into their
heads that there might be someone else around. If there was only some
way to advertise!”

“Advertising costs money. Besides, how would we do it? Or where?”

Oddly enough that question was in a manner quickly settled for them.
Willard had scarcely finished when Spider Wells, much out of breath and
very red of face, panted up to the platform where the partners were
seated on a baggage truck.

“Gee, I was afraid I’d miss you fellows!” gasped Spider, mopping his
heated brow as he swung himself to the truck beside Tom.

“It’s nice to be missed,” murmured Willard.

“I want to ride back with you,” continued Spider. “Jerry was telling me
about the dandy ride he had this morning. He’s chopping kindling now
for his mother. She’s going to give him a quarter if he chops all the
afternoon and he’s going to have another ride.”

Spider put his hand in a trousers pocket, pulled it out again and
opened it under Tom’s nose. “I brought my quarter with me, Tom.”

The boys laughed and Willard said: “Sorry, Spider, but I guess you had
your walk for nothing. We’re not going back to town until after the
3:14 goes through.”

Spider’s face fell. “You’re not? Why?”

Tom explained. Spider’s mild blue eyes blinked. Then,

“Well, what time is it now?” he asked.

“Twenty-five past two,” responded Willard, leaning back so that he
could see the clock in the waiting-room through the nearest window.
Spider sighed with relief.

“That’s all right then,” he said. “I’ll wait. There isn’t anything
going on to-day, anyway.”

“Isn’t the team playing Cold Spring this afternoon?” Tom enquired.

“Yes, but it costs ten cents each way on the trolley and I thought I’d
rather have a ride in your automobile. Besides, Cold Spring hasn’t any
sort of a team. I saw Jimmy Lippit this morning and he said we’d win
easily. Jimmy’s going to play to-day. Jordan’s gone away for a month;
gone to the beach. Wish I was!”

“Don’t be a chump, Spider,” said Tom. “We aren’t going to take your
quarter. You could have gone to Cold Spring and had your ride with us,
too. We didn’t charge Jerry anything――――”

“You didn’t!” Spider’s blue eyes opened wide. “Why, he said you took
him and Teddy down to the station and back again and that the fare was
a quarter each way!”

“So it is,” laughed Willard, “but they didn’t pay it. You hang around
until the 3:14 goes, Spider, and we’ll give you a good ride.”

“Honest? That’s awfully good of you. I――I’m willing to pay, though,
Will. I’ve never ridden in one of those, you know. Have you fellows
been making a lot of money?”

Tom shook his head. “We haven’t got rich yet,” he answered dryly.
“Haven’t taken in more than twenty or thirty dollars to-day.”

Spider’s eyes grew round again until Willard laughed. “The fact is,
Spider,” said Willard, “we can’t get folks to ride with us yet. They’re
so used to riding up with Connors’ men that they don’t even see us.”

“That’s too bad.” Spider frowned. “Couldn’t you――couldn’t you
advertise?”

“Just what Tom suggested. But I told him advertising costs money.
Besides, where would we advertise to catch the folks that travel on the
trains? You see, they come from all around.”

“A lot of them come from right here,” said Tom. “Now, if――――”

“I tell you!” exclaimed Spider. “I’ll get father to put an article in
the paper about you.” Spider’s father was proprietor and editor of the
_News-Patriot_, Audelsville’s principal daily newspaper. “He will do it
if I ask him to and it won’t cost you a cent!”

“Why――――” began Willard.

“I’ll get him to put it in to-morrow morning’s paper,” continued Spider
enthusiastically. “All about how you two fellows bought the automobile
and fixed it up yourselves and are carrying passengers to and from the
station for a quarter, which is twenty-five cents less than Connors
charges, and――and――――” Spider paused, out of breath.

“That would be fine,” said Tom gratefully, “but I don’t know that we
ought to let you do it, Spider. If we could pay for it――――”

“But the paper always prints things about any new――er――industry,”
protested Spider. He pulled a small paper-covered memorandum book from
his pocket, found a pencil with a much chewed point and faced Tom
eagerly. “What’s the name of your company?” he demanded.

Tom told him and Spider wrote laboriously in the book. Finally, “You
look in the _News-Patriot_ to-morrow morning,” he advised triumphantly,
putting his book away. “When you fellows get on your feet and can
afford it you can put an advertisement in; I’ll tell father you said
you would, shall I?”

“Why, yes,” replied Willard doubtfully. “I guess we could do
that――later. And we’re very much obliged, Spider, for what you’re
doing.”

“’Tain’t anything,” said Spider carelessly. “After all, you see it’s
really news, Will; and a paper prints the news anyway, don’t it?”

Willard acknowledged that he presumed it did, and then, as it was
a quarter to three, they started the engine, Spider looking on
interestedly, and chugged away to the paper mills. Spider returned to
the baggage truck to await their return. Their passenger appeared soon
after they had pulled up near the gate in the fence, and Mr. Martin was
with him. The latter, a man of about fifty years, rather tall and very
precisely dressed, accompanied his visitor to the automobile, viewing
the latter with frank curiosity and some amusement, and shook hands as
he said good bye.

“Glad you came up, Mr. Latham,” he said cordially. “Very glad to
have seen you. I don’t think there will be any further trouble about
shipments, now that we understand each other. Sometime when you’re
up this way I wish you’d let me know. I’d like to have you meet Mrs.
Martin and take dinner with us.”

On the way back Mr. Latham seemed to have got over his impatience.
He sat back easily in the tonneau――as easily as the jounces would
