allow――and smoked a cigar. At the station, which they reached ten
minutes before the local train was due, Tom stopped the car across the
road from the platform.

“Is this as near as you can take me?” asked the passenger in surprise.

“Yes, sir. We’re not allowed to go up to the platform. Connors, who has
the livery stable here, has the privilege and we have to stand over
here. I’m sorry.”

“Humph!” Mr. Latham stepped down into the dust of the road and pulled
out his pocketbook. “Another of those combinations in restraint of
trade, eh? I think if I were you I’d see if I couldn’t get the road to
give me a stand. Let me see, fifty cents, wasn’t it?”

“Twenty-five, sir,” replied Tom.

“Oh.” Mr. Latham handed over a dollar bill.

“I’ll see if I can get change in the station, sir,” said Tom, getting
out.

“Have you spent that half-dollar already?” asked their passenger with a
smile.

“No, sir, but that’s all I have with me. It won’t take a minute――――”

“Tut, tut! Give me the half and let it go at that. I dare say you’ve
done that much damage to your springs running over that dump.”

“Thank you, sir,” murmured Tom, diving into his pocket for the coin in
question. When he found it he glanced at it regretfully and seemed so
loath to part with it that Mr. Latham noticed it.

“Why, you’re a regular miser, boy,” he laughed. “You just hate to give
up money, don’t you?”

Tom blushed, but Willard thought they owed their benefactor an
explanation. “It isn’t that, sir,” he said. “Tom wanted to keep that
half because it’s the first money we’ve made with the car.”

“Really? You mean that I was your first passenger? That’s quite
interesting, boys. I should feel honored, I’m sure. Then you haven’t
been driving this――this vehicle long?”

“We just started to-day,” said Tom. “We haven’t had much luck yet, sir.”

“Well, it takes time to build up trade. Keep trying; that’s the way to
win, boys. Sorry to deprive you of your half-dollar, but I guess that
bill will do just as well to keep, won’t it?”

“Better,” laughed Tom. “Thank you very much, sir.”

Mr. Latham nodded, smiled, and crossed to the station. Spider, who had
been impatiently walking about the platform, hurried across and climbed
in. “Know who that was, fellows?” he demanded excitedly as Tom swung
The Ark around toward town.

“No, who?” asked Willard.

“That’s H. R. Latham, the First Vice-President of the road.”

“Honest?”

“Sure thing! I’ve seen him two or three times. Funny Mr. Martin didn’t
send his carriage for him, wasn’t it?”

“I sort of think he did,” said Tom softly. “I saw the Martin rig drive
up just as we started away from the train.”

“You did?” exclaimed Willard. “You didn’t say anything about it. Why,
it’s dollars to doughnuts it came for Mr. Latham!”

“That’s what I thought,” answered Tom dryly. “And that’s why I didn’t
say anything. Think I wanted to lose a passenger?”

Willard and Spider laughed delightedly. Presently, though, as they
turned up River Street, Willard sighed and then frowned.

“I wish,” he said, “we’d known who he was, Tom. We might have asked him
to let us have a stand at the station.”

“Gee!” said Tom. “That’s so! We might go back, Will?”

But at that instant the train made the crossing, and so Tom, who had
slowed down the car, advanced the throttle lever again and continued on
his way with a sigh for the neglected opportunity.




                              CHAPTER XI

                        THE _NEWS-PATRIOT_ AIDS


That evening Tom, who made the trip to the 6:05 train alone, picked
up two passengers and so swelled the day’s receipts to one dollar and
a half. Connors seldom sent more than one carriage to the 6:05 and on
this occasion Pat Herron was late and Tom reaped what small harvest
there was before the livery hack reached the platform. Pat’s look of
chagrin more than made up for the insults to his beloved Ark that Tom
had been forced to bear.

The next morning Tom and Willard went around to the hotel and saw the
proprietor, Mr. Timothy Meechin. Tim, as he was called, was a stout,
good-natured man with florid face and a loud laugh who had inherited
the hotel property from his father, “Meechin’s” having been a road
tavern in the old days when Audelsville was only a wayside settlement.
Almost everyone liked Tim Meechin, and his hotel was well conducted and
popular, which was a fortunate thing since it was the only hostelry
deserving the name in town. But, although Mr. Meechin was kindness
itself and seemed genuinely interested in the boys’ venture, he had to
refuse their request.

“It’s like this,” he said, a thumb in each arm-hole of his vest――he
was seldom seen with a coat――――“it’s like this, boys. Bill Connors has
a sort of――of a franchise, d’ye see, to carry folks from the hotel to
the depot, and t’other way, too, d’ye see. It’s a sort of a contract
we made years ago and I wouldn’t scarcely like to go back on it, d’ye
see. O’ course I can’t interfere with you if you bring somebody from
the depot up here; you got a right to do that; but I wouldn’t like you
should stand outside the hotel and take custom away from Bill. You see
yourselves, boys, that that wouldn’t do.”

“It seems as if Mr. Connors was operating a sort of transportation
trust,” said Willard with a sigh.

“Then there’s another thing,” continued Tim Meechin. “You fellows carry
folks for a quarter and Bill he gets fifty cents. So if I let you stand
outside the hotel, you’d get all of Bill’s trade away from him sooner
or later, d’ye see, and that wouldn’t be hardly fair to Bill; now would
it?”

“I don’t see that,” Tom objected. “If we can afford to carry folks for
a quarter it seems to me that’s our look-out. All Mr. Connors would
have to do would be to――to meet competition, to put his price down,
too.”

“Ah, there it is, d’ye see! You fellows have an automobile which don’t
cost much to run, but Bill he has a lot of horses to feed and look
after and a lot of help to pay wages to. Follows, don’t it, that he
can’t carry passengers as cheap as you can?”

“I suppose so,” Tom granted, “but――but if you stick to that idea, why,
there wouldn’t be any competition at all!”

Mr. Meechin nodded untroubledly. “Right you are. It’s competition
that’s ruinin’ the country, boys. What would I do, now, if a fellow
came along, d’ye see, and opened a hotel across the street there? Say
he bought the Perkins block and put up a new hotel. Where’d I be?”

“Why――why, if you gave just as good as he did and charged no more――――”

“But he’d have a new building, d’ye see, with, say, a bathroom to every
suite and――and a roof-garden on top, and one of those restaurants in
the cellar and――” Mr. Meechin was getting quite excited and wrought up
at the bare thought of the contingency. He shook his head decidedly.
“First come, first served, boys; that’s my motto. Here I am and here
I’ve been for thirty years, and my father before me, d’ye see, and what
right has a fellow who, maybe, never saw Audelsville before to come
and try to ruin my business and put me in the poor house? ’Tain’t fair
dealing!”

“Well, if you look at it that way,” murmured Willard.

“There’s no other way to look at it, right,” said Mr. Meechin
decisively. “And it’s the same way with Bill Connors. Bill has his
living to make and his family to look after. He needs the money, boys.
And――and I guess you don’t――much, eh? It’s a sort of a lark with you,
d’ye see?”

“It isn’t a lark at all,” replied Tom warmly. “It’s business. We’re in
it to make money, and we’ve just as much right to make money as Mr.
Connors has. Of course if you say we can’t stop outside your hotel and
bid for passengers, that’s all right, but it doesn’t seem quite fair to
me, sir.”

“It’s fair enough, Tom,” said Willard soothingly, “if Mr. Meechin has
an agreement with Connors. I suppose if we stood on the other side of
the street and any of your guests chose to walk over there you couldn’t
object, sir?”

Mr. Meechin hesitated. Finally: “No, I suppose I couldn’t,” he
acknowledged. “But I warn you fair, boys, that I’d have to advise my
folks to take Connors’ hack. I’ve got to live up to my agreement with
Bill, d’ye see.”

“That’s all right, sir. And thank you very much. Good morning.”

Tom remained indignant for some time. “If we can’t stand at the
station and can’t stand at the hotel,” he said bitterly, “I guess we’d
better sell The Ark and go out of business right now.”

“Maybe, though, we can get permission from the railroad if we write to
the superintendent or whoever he said we should write to. It’s worth
trying, anyway. And then if Simms will let us stand in front of his
shop we might soon get business from the hotel. Men don’t mind walking
across the street to save a quarter and get there quicker, I guess.
Let’s go and see Simms now.”
