
Simms’ was one of those drug stores that fill their windows with signs
and placards of patent medicines, headache cures, and temperance
drinks, and very little else. It was a rather dirty, run-down little
shop, but as it was directly opposite the entrance of Meechin’s Hotel
it did a fair business.

Mr. Simms, the proprietor, was a little, light-haired, thin-voiced man
of fifty-odd, who looked as though he might be his own best customer
for patent remedies. When Willard proffered his request the druggist
blinked his eyes for a moment and then smiled craftily.

“Why, I guess there isn’t any objection, boys,” he said. “Of course
it’ll be worth something to you, I guess.”

“How do you mean?” asked Willard.

“Well, it ought to be worth a few dollars a month, hadn’t it?
Say――shall we say ten?”

“Sure,” laughed Tom, mirthlessly, “let’s say fifty. It isn’t much
harder.”

Mr. Simms frowned at him, and so did Willard.

“We can’t pay for the privilege just now, sir,” Willard said frankly,
“but if after we give it a fair trial we find that we’re getting custom
we might consider it, sir.”

The druggist, however, was obdurate and the boys went off. It was then
nearly time to go to the station to meet the first train and they
hurried up Pine Street to get the car. It was on the way that Willard
recollected that they had not thought to look in the morning paper for
the article Spider Wells had promised would be there. Unfortunately
Mr. Benton had taken his copy of the _News-Patriot_ to the post-office
with him and so when, after some difficulty, I must acknowledge, The
Ark had been persuaded to start and was on its way toward the station,
Willard insisted on stopping at a news stand and buying a copy. It was
well worth the two cents he invested, however. The article was quite
lengthy, and was headed in bold, black type, “Build Their Own Car and
Operate It――Two Audelsville Boys, Sons of Well-Known Citizens, Show
Mechanical Genius and Business Acumen.” Willard read it while Tom
guided The Ark stationward.

“There’s a new transportation line in town,” said the _News-Patriot_.
“If you don’t believe it watch for the gray automobile that is to
be seen any day flying between the railroad station and the hotel.
Audelsville has a new business enterprise and its name is the Benton
and Morris Transportation Company, Thomas Benton, President, Willard
Morris, General Manager. The lads, one the son of our popular
postmaster, and the other the son of Mr. Garford Morris, the well-known
cabinet maker of Logan Street, are each under eighteen years of age,
and yet, we understand, have practically built the automobile unaided.
It is a fine looking machine, as all who have seen it in its trips
through town will testify. Audelsville should be proud of two such
clever young citizens.

“The auto makes trips between Meechin’s Hotel and the station, meeting
all trains, and handling passengers and baggage comfortably and
expeditiously. The reasonable charge of twenty-five cents for the trip
each way is made and there is no doubt but that the traveling public
will warmly welcome this means of transportation, especially when, as
is almost always the case, the trolley line fails to make connection
with the trains. Young Benton is the driver of the car, while his
friend and business associate, Willard Morris, attends to securing
trade. Both boys are well known and popular. Morris graduated from high
school last month and Benton is in the senior class. The _News-Patriot_
wishes them all good fortune in their plucky venture.”

“There’s a lot there that isn’t so,” said Tom, trying to disguise
his pleasure with a critical frown. “That about our making the car
ourselves, for instance.”

“Yes, but who cares? It makes a better story, Tom. Why, this ought to
be worth a lot to us as advertising. It was dandy of Spider, wasn’t it?”

“Yes; Mr. Wells, too. We ought to find Spider and ride him around all
day, Will! Just――just read it again, will you?”

It was well they had the newspaper story to keep their spirits up
that morning, for it wasn’t until the 1:57 train pulled in that they
succeeded in securing their first passenger, an elderly gentleman
who confided to them that he had never ridden in one of “these here
contraptions afore” and whose destination was so far the other side of
town that the boys doubted whether they had made or lost on the trip!
Business looked up a little toward evening, however, and from the 6:05
they gathered three commercial travelers, who filled the car with bags
and made good-natured fun of it all the way to the hotel. What added
vastly to the boys’ pleasure at that time was the fact that Pat Herron
returned from the station with an empty hack!

That evening Willard came to Tom’s house and the boys confided their
problems to Mr. Benton and asked his advice. After talking matters over
it was decided that they should write an application for a stand at
the station and get as many signatures of Audelsville citizens as they
could. Then either Tom or Willard would make the trip to Providence and
see the superintendent personally.

“There’s a heap of red tape in railroad offices,” said Mr. Benton, “and
maybe if you sent your application through the mail you wouldn’t hear
anything from it for weeks and weeks. It’ll cost a couple of dollars to
make the trip, but you’ll hurry things up a whole lot, I’d say.”

Mr. Benton did not, however, favor the scheme of paying Mr. Simms, or
anyone else, for the privilege of standing in front of his store. “I
don’t believe,” he said, “that it’s necessary for you to pay anything.
I guess you’ve got a right to stand anywhere along the street you want
to, just so you keep off the crossings. Of course, I wouldn’t advise
you to stop in front of Simms’, now that he’s looking for money, but
there’s plenty of other places along there.”

So the next morning, about twenty minutes before it was time for the
9:01 to go through, Tom stopped The Ark in front of a small fruit
store, next door to Simms’, and hung out his sign where it could be
plainly seen from the hotel. A good many folks paused and looked the
car over and asked questions, having evidently read the article in the
paper of the day before. Even the occupants of the big trolley car that
stopped on the siding nearby showed unusual interest. Tom was alone
to-day, for it had been decided that Willard was to secure names to
the petition and was already at work. Connors’ hack drove up in front
of the hotel and Pat Herron scowled when he saw the automobile across
the street. But he made no remarks. Pat had decided to treat the rival
concern with silent contempt. Presently three travelers emerged from
the hotel and climbed into the hack, although Tom squawked his horn
enticingly. Then the hack rolled away and Tom started his engine and
followed. In front of the common someone called and he slowed down and
looked around. It was Willard, just coming out of the Court House.

“How are you getting on?” asked Tom, casting a glance toward the clock
in the tower overhead.

“Fine and dandy. I’ve got fourteen names already. It won’t take me any
time to get fifty signatures. Everyone seems willing to sign. One man,
though, refused; Hall, of Hall and Duggett. It seems Connors hauls
their freight for them, and he said he didn’t want to do anything to
hurt Connors. But we’ll get plenty of signatures without his. How are
you getting on?”

Tom shrugged. “Nothing doing yet. There were three from the hotel, but
the hack got them. Well, I must be getting down; it’s most nine.”

“Wait a minute. Did you see this morning’s _Herald_? It’s got something
about us. I guess they cribbed it from the _News-Patriot_. I’ve got the
paper at home and I’ll show it to you later. We’re getting a heap of
advertising, Tom.”

“Yes, but we aren’t getting much business,” replied Tom pessimistically.
“See you later, Will.”




                              CHAPTER XII

                      WILLARD ENCOUNTERS A FRIEND


Two days later, Willard, armed with his petition, made the trip to
Providence. He had secured fifty-five signatures without difficulty,
and as they stood for the prominent and influential citizens of
Audelsville both he and Tom felt comfortably certain of success.
Willard had offered to let Tom make the journey, but Tom had pointed
out that if he did they would lose a day with the car. “Maybe it
wouldn’t make much difference,” he added gloomily, “but I guess I’d
better stay here and attend to business. We need all the money we can
get.”

So it was Willard who boarded the 9:01 that Monday morning and settled
himself back in a red plush seat with a feeling of vast importance. The
agent at Audelsville had told him where to find the railroad offices
when he reached his destination and had even taken enough interest in
the project to suggest that Willard see the Division Superintendent
in the forenoon. He would be in better humor then, thought the local
agent.

Possibly neither you nor I would have considered the trip to Providence
anything more than a bore, but to Willard, who seldom traveled by
train, it was quite exciting and very far from being a bore. He arrived
at Providence almost a whole hour before noon and made his way at
once to the offices of the railroad, which occupied all of a big,
old-fashioned brick building across the street from the station. An
elevator took him past one floor and deposited him on the next, and he
wandered down a long, dim corridor lined with doors whose upper halves
held ground glass variously inscribed with figures and letters. Room 18
was found at last and, uncertain whether to knock or walk boldly in,
Willard finally turned the knob and entered. Inside he found himself
confronted by a counter which ran the width of the room and behind
which were three desks occupied by as many busy men. As no one paid any
attention to him, at the end of a minute Willard summoned his courage.

“I’d like to see the Division Superintendent,” he announced to the room
at large. A young man with a worried expression looked up and fixed
Willard with a stern gaze.

“Business?” he demanded.

“Yes, sir,” replied Willard.

“Business?” demanded the man in a louder tone.

