“Oh――why――if you please, I’d like to see him about getting a stand at
Audelsville,” stammered Willard.

“Stand?” The man frowned. A second occupant of the room bobbed his head
inquiringly around the corner of his desk, scowled and disappeared
again. Willard wondered if he was the Superintendent. “What sort of a
stand?” demanded the first man crossly.

“Why, a stand for an automobile.” Willard pulled his petition from his
pocket and the man arose and came to the counter, stretching a hand
forth for the document. Willard gave it to him and the man skimmed it
quickly. Then:

“I see,” he said rather contemptuously, deftly dipping a pen in an
ink-well and proffering it. “All right. Put your name and address in
the corner here and leave it.”

“Leave it?” Willard, with pen in hand, hesitated.

“Yes. We’ll let you hear in a few days. Hurry up, please.”

“But――but I’d rather see Mr. Cummings himself, sir!”

“I dare say. But Mr. Cummings is busy. He can’t see everyone, you know,
kid.”

“But I came all the way from Audelsville, sir!” pleaded Willard. “I――I
might just as well have mailed this if――if I can’t see him.”

“Just as well,” replied the other, yawning frankly and glancing at the
electric clock on the wall. “Well?”

“Don’t you think he’d see me for just a minute? Would you mind asking
him, please?”

“Yes, I’d mind very much,” was the impatient reply. “If you want to
leave this application put your name on it. If you don’t, move along.
We’re busy here, my young friend.”

“But――――” Willard sighed disappointedly――“if I could just wait here
until he was at leisure――――”

The door behind him opened and closed briskly, and a familiar voice
asked: “Cummings in, Jones?”

“Yes, Mr. Latham. Step right in, sir.” The man, now smiling and eager
to please, hurried toward the end of the counter, lifted a hinged
section of it and stood aside while the newcomer hurried through and
tapped at a door which Willard had not noticed. In an instant the door
had opened and closed and Mr. Latham had disappeared into the inner
office. The clerk, for Willard decided that he was no more than that,
sauntered back.

“That was Mr. Latham, wasn’t it?” asked Willard.

The clerk nodded.

“Well, I guess I’d like to speak to him when he comes out. May I wait
here?”

“Do you know Mr. Latham?”

Willard nodded as carelessly as the clerk. There was nothing to be
gained by modesty, he felt. “Yes, I know him,” he said.

Evidently impressed, the clerk moved back to his desk. “All right. Take
a seat there.”

Willard returned his petition to his pocket and retired to one of the
two chairs along the wall. Ten minutes passed, and then ten minutes
more, and finally the door opened again and Mr. Latham came through.
Willard waited until the first vice-president was outside the counter.
Then:

“Mr. Latham, may I speak to you a minute, please?” he asked,
intercepting the gentleman in front of the door.

“Eh?” The official paused. “Certainly, my boy. Hello, I’ve seen you
before, haven’t I?”

“Yes, sir, I――we――took you to the paper mills the other day, you know;
at Audelsville, sir.”

“Of course! How are you?” Mr. Latham shook hands heartily. “Let me see,
did you tell me your name?”

“No, sir. My name’s Willard Morris.”

“Well, Morris, what can I do for you? Here, let’s sit down a minute.
Now then!”

“We want to be allowed to stand our automobile at the station, sir.
You see, as it is now, they won’t let us because Connors, the livery
stable man, has the――the exclusive privilege. It’s hard to get
passengers, Mr. Latham, unless you’re at the platform. Folks don’t see
you, sir.”

“I suppose not. What’s this?”

“It’s a petition. It’s got fifty-five signatures on it, sir. I thought
maybe――――”

“Very business-like, Morris.” Mr. Latham smiled as he ran his eyes over
the petition. “Well, you’d better see Cummings about this. He’s the one
to go to.”

“That’s what I came here for, sir, but they said he was too busy and
wanted me to leave this.”

“Oh, I guess he’s got time to see you. You come with me.” Mr. Latham
led the way past the counter and knocked again at the inner door.
“Charlie, here’s a young gentleman who wants to see you,” announced the
First Vice-President as, followed by Willard, he entered and closed
the door again. “He’s got a petition signed by about half the citizens
of Audelsville. See what you can do for him, will you? Morris, this
is Mr. Cummings. Charlie, shake hands with Mr. Willard Morris, one of
Audelsville’s hustling citizens.”

The big man at the big desk smiled and shook hands. “Glad to do
anything I can for you, Mr. Morris,” he said. “What’s wanted?”

“Show him that document, Morris,” directed Mr. Latham.

Mr. Cummings read it and then looked dubiously at Mr. Latham.

“Seems to me we’ve let somebody have the station privilege at
Audelsville, Henry,” he said.

“We have, but competition’s the life of trade, they say, Charlie, and
these young gentlemen are particular friends of mine. I guess we can
let them in, can’t we?”

“I suppose so.” Mr. Cummings pressed one of a row of buttons at the
edge of his desk and almost at once a clerk entered. “Dictation,
Graham.” The clerk seated himself, pulled a book from his pocket
and poised a pencil. Mr. Cummings fixed his eyes on the ceiling.
“To――――” He glanced at the petition in his hand――“To Benton and Morris
Transportation Company, Audelsville, R. I. ‘Gentlemen: Your application
for platform privilege at Audelsville station received and same is
hereby granted, terminable at our discretion. We have notified our
agent to afford you space for one’――eh?”

“Could you make it two, please?” asked Willard.

The Passenger Agent shot a glance of inquiry at the First Vice-President,
and the latter, with a smile, nodded.

“All right. ‘Space for two vehicles. Respectfully, and so forth.’
Typewrite that immediately, please, and I’ll sign it. Here’s another.
‘Agent, Audelsville, R. I. Benton and Morris Transportation Company
granted platform privilege until further notice. You will provide them
space for two vehicles. Respectfully and so forth.’ That all I can do
for you?”

“Yes, sir, thank you very much,” replied Willard. “Good morning.”




                             CHAPTER XIII

                      PAT HERRON LOSES HIS TEMPER


“Well, that wasn’t so difficult, was it?” inquired Mr. Latham as they
left the office a few minutes later.

Willard smiled. “I guess it might have been if you hadn’t helped,” he
answered.

“Perhaps. Division Superintendents are pretty busy persons. Well, good
luck to you, my boy, and I hope the transportation company will get
lots of business and soon begin to declare dividends.”

Mr. Latham shook hands in front of the building and Willard, reassuring
himself by a look at the station clock, made his way to a small lunch
room and dined regally on a bowl of hulled corn afloat in milk and
frosted with sugar, two doughnuts, a piece of blueberry pie and a cup
of coffee. After that he strolled around the city for a half-hour
and finally boarded the express that took him uneventfully back to
Audelsville and deposited him on the platform at six minutes after two.

“Auto to any part of the city! Twenty-five cents to any part of the
city! Ride up, sir? Auto to―――― Hello, Will! I didn’t think you’d make
this train. Did you――Meechin’s Hotel? Yes, sir. I’ll take your bag.
Right across the road, sir.”

And Tom, casting speculative glances up and down the platform in quest
of other customers, led the way to the car, followed by Willard and the
owner of the bag, the latter viewing irresolutely Connors’ hack, into
which Pat Herron was conducting three other arrivals. But Tom gave him
no time to change his mind.

“Here you are, sir! Have you there in three minutes!” he declared,
depositing the gentleman’s bag in front and jumping into his seat.
“Turn her over, Will! All right!”

_Honk! Honk!_ The Ark was off with a noisy fusillade from the exhaust
and a shuddering grinding of gears and Tom turned anxiously to Willard.

