“Well, if he passes four men to-day it will help a lot,” said Tom with
a laugh. “Why didn’t he stick to baseball, Jimmy?”

“Oh, he got married and had to earn money. So he went into the mill. He
hasn’t played ball for a couple of years, I guess, but I don’t suppose
he’s forgotten how.”

He hadn’t, and there wasn’t much to that game after four innings. Doyle
may have lost some of his cunning through lack of practice, but he
had sufficient skill left to keep high school guessing. In the second
inning, and again in the fourth, high school got men on bases, and in
the fourth tallied two runs, a lucky hit by Captain Madden sending in
a couple of runners. But that was all the scoring high school was able
to do. On the other hand, the mill team knocked Billy Younger out of
the box in the third, piling up five tallies. Billy had an off day for
once and was extremely unsteady. Chester Madden pulled him out and went
to the mound himself. Chester got a sound drubbing and when the ninth
inning was at last over the mill team had won by twelve runs to two.
Spider Wells and Jimmy Lippit walked back with Tom and Willard――Jimmy
Brennan had left them to hob nob with the redoubtable Doyle――and
explained the defeat satisfactorily. Spider, flourishing his scorebook,
proved, to his own satisfaction at least, that the game had been thrown
away by poor generalship. Jimmy scoffed.

“Poor generalship nothing! Why, we couldn’t hit that red-headed
professional, you chump! Nobody could! We all told Chester he had no
business letting them pitch a fellow like that against us! What do you
expect? Why, every fellow on their team was twenty years old or more.
And at that they only got eleven hits off us!”

Tom and Willard left Jimmy and Spider at the corner of Washington and
Linden Streets, still wrangling over the game, and went to Willard’s
house. There, on the front steps, with the assistance of several slices
of cake, they talked over Jimmy Brennan’s idea of renting the car
evenings. In the end they decided to try the scheme, and Willard got
a paper and pencil and between them they drew up an announcement to
be printed on cardboard and placed in the shop windows. When finally
corrected the legend ran as follows:

                        AUTOMOBILE FOR HIRE!

    The Benton and Morris Transportation Company’s Five-Passenger
    Touring Car, with experienced chauffeur, may be engaged for
    pleasure rides any evening after seven o’clock. Terms, Two
    Dollars an hour. Make up your parties! Apply to Thomas Benton,
    37 Cross St.

“There,” said Willard, “that ought to fill the bill. We’ll get
Higginson to print about two dozen of these and we’ll put them in the
store windows. Bet you we’ll get a lot of bids!”

“Will the store-keepers let us put them in their windows, though?”
asked Tom. “I don’t see why they should.”

“Of course they will! Don’t you see all sorts of notices in the
windows? Dances and picnics and entertainments of all sorts. Sure,
they’ll let us put them in. I guess Higginson is closed by this time,
isn’t he?”

As it was almost six o’clock, and a Saturday besides, Tom thought he
was. “We’ll take it to him the first thing Monday morning. I hope Jimmy
gets the car fixed all right this evening.”

“We ought to have another car,” said Willard thoughtfully.

“Yes, we ought to have a flock of them; about thirty or forty, I guess.
You don’t know just where we’d get ’em, do you?”

“We might find another as cheap as The Ark if we looked around. You
can’t say she wasn’t a bargain.”

Tom bent and peered under the steps and then looked carefully about the
tiny front yard. “I’m looking around, Will, but I don’t see one,” he
announced gravely. “Funny you can never find a thing if you want it!”

Willard grinned. “Just the same, though,” he said stoutly, “I’ll bet
you we’ll have another some day.”

“If we do you’ll have to run it. I can’t attend to more than one at a
time.”

“We could hire someone, couldn’t we? Maybe Jimmy Brennan――――”

“Or Jerry Lippit,” laughed Tom. “How would he do?”

“Guess I’d better learn how myself. Will you teach me?”

“Sure. You know a lot about it already, don’t you?”

“A little. What’s the matter with getting out early Monday morning and
giving me a lesson?”

“All right. I guess it would be a pretty good thing if you could run
it, Will. Of course, you won’t be here next winter, but―――― Say, who’s
going to run The Ark when high school begins again? We’ve got to be
thinking about that pretty soon.”

“I know. Seems to me we’ve proved by this time, Tom, that the thing’s
going to be a success, eh?”

“Of course it is! And that’s why it won’t do to stop it just when we’ve
got it going well. I guess we’ll have to advertise for someone to come
here and run it, Will. How much do you suppose we’d have to pay him?”

“A couple of dollars a day, I guess. Say I wonder――――”

“What?”

“I wonder if we could get Jimmy Brennan, Tom!”

“Gee, if we could! I suppose, though, he makes a lot more at the
machine shop than we could afford to pay him.”

“I suppose so. Would you ask him?”

“Not yet. Let’s wait till we’ve been running a full month, Will,
and then see just how we stand. Are you keeping a strict account of
everything?”

“Of course I am!” replied Willard indignantly. “I’ve got every cent set
down.”

“That’s the ticket. Then at the end of the month we――we’ll strike a
balance and see where we stand. Then we’ll know how much we can afford
to offer Jimmy. I don’t believe he makes much more than twenty a week,
Will.”

“Neither do we――yet,” replied Willard dryly. “I guess we will, though.
Father was saying the other evening that there’s a heap more travel in
winter than there is in summer. So if we can make, say, twenty-five a
week now we ought to make more in the winter, Tom.”

“Sure. Well, I guess it’s almost supper time. Will you come over this
evening and see Jimmy fix the car?”

“Yes, I’ll be around. Why don’t you stay and have supper with us,
though?”

“Can’t; I’ve got some things to do. You come over. Say, maybe we can
sort of find out from Jimmy how much he’s getting now, eh? You――you
might kind of get him talking, you know, Will.”

“I like your cheek!” laughed Willard. “Why don’t you do it yourself?”

“Oh, you’re the diplomat of this firm,” answered Tom with a grin.




                              CHAPTER XVI

                     AN INTERVIEW WITH THE POLICE


On Monday The Ark was running again apparently as well as ever save for
an occasional rumbling sound that issued from the differential. Perhaps
had The Ark been a quieter car normally the noise from the broken
pinion would have been more apparent. As it was, one would hardly have
guessed that anything was wrong. Very early Monday morning Tom and
Willard went out on the Graywich road and Willard had his first lesson.
As he had attended most if not all of the lessons given Tom by Jimmy
Brennan, and had even held the wheel himself once or twice, Willard
was not quite a novice. But whereas Tom had taken to driving as a duck
takes to water Willard was decidedly suspicious and nervous.

“Oh, go on!” Tom would command impatiently. “Throw your lever! It isn’t
going to bite you!”

But Willard wasn’t taking anyone’s word for that and so made slow
progress. It wasn’t until he had been through at least a dozen road
lessons that he got on what Tom called speaking terms with The Ark.
But although his progress was slow it was also certain, and by the end
of that summer Willard had become in some respects a better automobile
driver than his partner. Tom’s style was a little bit slap-dash,
a little bit breath-taking, in fact. Changing gears was a noisy
operation with Tom and he had a way of swinging around corners without
releasing his clutch or using his brake that was more spectacular than
scientific. Willard, on the other hand, could go from low to second
and through to high without the occupant of the back seat suspecting
it, could keep the speed even without apparent effort and was a much
saner chap at the corners. He never, however, quite got over his awe of
the car and the engine remained to him a wonderful mystery to the end.
If you wanted to take a nice, quiet ride, without any shock to your
nerves, you would do well to engage Willard for chauffeur, but if you
wanted to make, say, the 9:01 express and had only five minutes to do
it in, you had best put your faith in Tom. In those days a speed limit
for automobiles had not yet been thought of in Audelsville, which was a
lucky thing for Thomas Benton!

Down at the station the relations between Pat Herron and his assistant,
Johnny Green, and the members of the Benton and Morris Transportation
Company remained strained. There were, however, no overt acts on the
part of the Connors’ interests during the first part of the week, and
Willard, who had predicted that Connors would either try to have their
platform privilege revoked or attempt to frighten them off in some
way, was surprised. Pat Herron, aside from an occasional sneer, was
strangely silent. Of course the competition for trade was as brisk
as ever, and alighting passengers were literally fought over on the
platform. As, however, Johnny Green had to remain and look after the
horses, it left only Pat Herron to solicit passengers, and, as there
