the checks. Rustle ’em right up, will you?”

The speaker, a nattily attired traveling salesman who had just arrived
on the 11:34 train, handed the two bits of pasteboard to Tom and, with
a sharp look at his watch, settled himself in The Ark. “Be sure and
have them up there at the side door inside fifteen minutes, son. I want
to skip back on the six o’clock.”

“All right, sir,” replied Tom cheerfully. But he was secretly dubious
as he walked around the station to give the checks to the agent.
Connors had a way of taking his time in the matter of delivering
baggage, and Tom much doubted that the sample cases would reach the
department store within the hour. The agent was sorting over baggage,
with the help of his assistant, a youth of eighteen, when Tom found
him.

“Mr. Tinker, will you get these up to Dunlop and Toll’s just as soon as
you can, please?” asked Tom. “The gentleman says he wants to get the
6:05 back this evening.”

Gus Tinker stretched a hand out for the checks, then hesitated and
shook his head in a worried way. “Sorry, Benton, but Connors says he
can’t handle baggage for you. Told me to tell you so.”

“He can’t?” exclaimed Tom. “Why――I don’t see――――”

“He’s sort of mad about you fellows buttin’ in on him,” explained the
agent. “Guess you’ll have to handle your own trunks.”

Tom hesitated a moment, at a loss. Then he hurried around the corner
of the station and signaled to Willard. In a few words he told the
latter of the new development. Willard frowned thoughtfully, while the
single occupant of The Ark impatiently honked the horn. Then, his face
clearing:

“It’s all right,” Willard declared. “Give me the checks. Hustle uptown
and dump me out at Walnut and Main. There’s a fellow there that does
teaming, and I’ll get him and have the things up in twenty minutes.”

“What’s wrong?” asked the drummer, as the boys came up. “Don’t spin any
yarn about those cases not being here!”

“They’re here, all right, sir,” replied Tom; “and we’ll have them up
inside of twenty minutes.”

“See that you do, son; I’m in a rush to-day.” The passenger settled
back in his seat and the automobile started off up River Street in a
hurry, passing Pat Herron and his hack in a cloud of dust. Luckily when
Willard left the car at Walnut Street the man he sought was dozing on
the seat of his tumble-down wagon under a faded red and white umbrella
which bore the legend, in letters laid on with black paint by an
unpracticed hand: “J. Duff, Local Express. Jobbing Done.”

While The Ark chugged on along Main Street to the department store
Willard explained to the half-awakened Mr. Duff what was required.
The expressman was not enthusiastic. The station was a long way off,
neither he nor his horse had had dinner, and two trunks were hardly
worth making the trip for. Finally, though, he agreed to bring the
cases up for thirty-five cents apiece, and all Willard’s persuasion
failed to lower the price.

“But Connors only charges a quarter,” he demurred.

“Then get him to do it,” responded Mr. Duff, with a yawn.

“There isn’t time. They’ve got to be at Dunlop & Toll’s right away. All
right, I’ll pay thirty-five. But you’ve got to hurry.”

Very leisurely Mr. Duff gathered up his reins and clicked to the
dejected-looking horse. Willard climbed to the seat and the shade
of the gaudy umbrella, and they set forth. Mr. Duff was not much of
a conversationalist, and Willard was busy thinking, and so they had
almost turned into River Street before either spoke. Then it was
Willard who broke the silence, and in very business-like tones.

“Look here,” he said. “Do you want to make some money every day?”

Mr. Duff viewed him uncertainly. Finally, “I might,” he answered
cautiously.

“Well, a fellow and I run an automobile to the station and fetch
passengers from the trains.” Mr. Duff nodded. “Very often they have
trunks and sample cases and things. Why can’t you haul those as well as
Connors?”

Mr. Duff viewed his horse thoughtfully for a moment.

“Where to?” he asked at last.

“Why, to the hotel, usually,” replied Willard a trifle impatiently.
“What difference does that make? The question is, will you engage to
haul our baggage for us at twenty-five cents apiece, if we let you
handle it all.”

The expressman flicked the horse gently with a worn-out whip, and
remained silent for the space of a minute. Then, “How many would there
be?” he inquired suspiciously.

“I don’t know. Some days there might be five or six; other days only
one or two, perhaps none at all.”

“Would you pay cash?”

“Of course! We’ll pay as soon as you do the work. But you’ve got to
agree to do it quickly. That is, if a trunk comes on the 11:34 you must
have it delivered by 12:00 or a little after.”

“I might be busy,” objected Mr. Duff. “’Sides, some of them trunks they
has nowadays is pretty heavy for one man to handle. I ain’t as young as
I used to be, mister.”

“The station agent will give you a hand with the heavy ones,” said
Willard, trying to conceal his exasperation. “Of course, if you don’t
want to do it, there’s Connors.”

“He don’t need the money like I do,” objected Mr. Duff. “I got a
family, I have. I’m a poor man. Times is hard.”

“Well, then, for the love of mud, why don’t you do it?” cried Willard.
Mr. Duff turned and viewed him in mild surprise.

“I ain’t said I wouldn’t, have I?” he asked complainingly.

“No; and you haven’t said you would! Now, which is it?”

“Twenty-five cents apiece, you said?” he inquired, as he backed the
wagon up to the platform. Willard nodded. Mr. Duff sighed as he tossed
the reins to the horse’s back. “I s’pose I’ll have to do it,” he said
dolefully.

The sample-cases reached Dunlop and Toll’s ten minutes late, for Mr.
Duff had never learned to do anything in a hurry. But the traveling man
had evidently not relied very implicitly on Tom’s promise to get them
there inside of twenty minutes and seemed quite satisfied. He handed
Willard fifty cents and Willard added two dimes to it and passed the
amount over to Mr. Duff.

“Now remember,” he said sternly, “you’re to hustle when I give you any
checks. By the way, if you aren’t at the corner of Walnut Street, where
can I find you?”

Mr. Duff shook his head slowly. “I dunno. I might be most anywhere, I
s’pose. Just you write the order on the slate and I’ll see it.”

“Oh, you have a slate, have you? Where is it?”

“On the post at the corner. Leastways, it’s there mostly, when the boys
don’t steal it on me.”

“All right. If you’re not there I’ll write on the slate and you’ll find
the checks at the station. I’ll tell the agent to give them to you.
Understand, do you?”

Mr. Duff nodded calmly. “S’pose I do,” he murmured, as he ambled back
to his wagon.

Tom, who had remained to make certain that the sample-cases arrived
safely, grinned as Willard joined him. “Smart, wide-awake old chap,
isn’t he?” he laughed.

“He’s a wonder!” agreed Willard. “Actually, it took him ten minutes to
get those two cases from the platform to his wagon, Tom! But he will
have to do. I’ve arranged with him to look after all our baggage and so
Connors needn’t worry us.”

“I wonder,” said Tom, as he headed The Ark toward Willard’s house, “if
it would pay us to have a horse and wagon of our own?”

“I thought of that,” replied Willard. “I don’t believe it would,
hardly. They say it costs about six dollars a week to feed a horse,
and――――”

“Six dollars a week!” exclaimed Tom. “What on? Chicken and asparagus?”

“Oats and hay. It’s a fact. Feed is awfully high. Then there’d be the
price of the horse and wagon.”

“We might hire them,” reflected Tom. “Well, we will see how your friend
Mr. Duff gets along. He may do all right.”

“He’d be fine,” laughed Willard, “if folks weren’t particular about
getting their trunks the day they arrived!”

On the whole, however, Mr. Duff proved, during the next fortnight,
fairly satisfactory. Several times, when he had trunks to deliver to
different addresses he managed to get them mixed and so left them at
the wrong places, and he was exasperatingly slow, but for that matter
Connors himself was far from infallible and Audelsville was not very
exacting in such matters.

A few days after Willard had made his arrangement with Mr. Duff an
incident occurred that ended all semblance of neutrality between the
rival companies. The new pinion had arrived and been put in place and
The Ark was running splendidly. Perhaps a more critical judge than
either Tom or Willard might have found fault with the car on the score
of excessive noise, but the owners were quite satisfied. The night
before Tom had taken a party of four to Graywich and back, thereby
adding the sum of six dollars to the firm’s exchequer, and had not
reached his bed until after midnight. As he arose every morning at
six he had not had much slumber and, consequently, was feeling a bit
