sleepy as he waited at the platform for the arrival of the 9:01 train.
As a rule the first train from the east dropped few passengers at
Audelsville and Willard’s services at the station were scarcely needed.
So he seldom accompanied The Ark on its first trip and Tom was alone on
the seat when Pat Herron drove up and took his place back of the car.
Tom glanced about and then closed his eyes again. Of late Connors had
been sending only the hack to the station, for the automobile had cut
into his business so that the surrey was no longer necessary, and so
when an instant later Tom heard wheels alongside he paid no attention,
supposing the passing vehicle to be a private carriage. Suddenly there
was a crash and a jar and Tom was rudely shaken out of his doze. A
heavy express wagon had backed into the front of The Ark. As Tom sprang
to his feet the driver of the wagon, Johnny Green, was looking back
with vast concern.

“Git ap, you old fool!” he cried to his horse, waving his whip
mightily. The horse obeyed, but when the wagon had pulled a foot or two
away a sudden tightening on the lines brought it back again against the
car. Tom, already on the ground and fighting-mad, made a dash at the
horse’s bridle.

“Leave him be!” bawled Johnny. “Take your hand from him!”

But Tom, tugging, pulled the prancing horse several yards up the
platform, Johnny threatening him with whip and tongue.

“You did that on purpose!” declared Tom angrily.

“I did not! He backed before I could stop him! And, anyway, you leave
my horse alone after this!”

“Then you learn how to drive him,” retorted Tom, aware of the mocking
gleam in Johnny’s eyes and knowing full well that Pat Herron was
enjoying this hugely. “You’ll pay for the damage, too, before you’re
through with me.” He went back to the front of the car and looked
it over. Fortunately the end of the springs had borne the brunt of
the attack. The paint was knocked from them, but that was easily
remedied. One search-light was bent and its glass broken and the end
of a mud-guard was crumpled. Trembling with indignation and anger, Tom
looked up to find Pat Herron grinning across at him from the seat of
the hack.

“Them things is easy broke, I’m thinkin’,” he observed.

“That’s all right. You can tell Connors it will cost him about twenty
dollars to fix it. I dare say he put you up to it!”

“Aw, forget it, sonny! Sure, didn’t you see ’twas an accident?”

“I saw it, but it wasn’t any accident, and you know it!” retorted Tom
hotly. “And somebody will pay for the damage, too!”

“Sure, I could buy one o’ them things for five dollars,” said Pat
Herron facetiously. “A fellow offered me a couple the other day would I
take ’em away.”

Tom, with a final look at the damage, climbed back to the seat in
dignified silence. Johnny Green had dismounted and was solicitously
examining the back of his wagon. Presently he turned, with a wink, to
Pat Herron.

“What for did you start your machine up like that and bump into me?” he
inquired in hurt tones. “Look at what you did to me paint!”

“I didn’t start my machine,” returned Tom indignantly. “You backed into
me on purpose, and I hope it scraped your paint all off.”

“Didn’t he start his machine and bump the back of me wagon, Pat?” asked
Johnny Green.

“Sure he did,” replied Pat with a grin. “I see him do it. It’s damages
he’ll be after payin’.”

“_I_ pay damages!” sputtered Tom. “Why, you――you――――”

But the train very considerately roared into the station at that moment
and further hostilities were interrupted. Tom had the satisfaction of
capturing the only two persons who wanted to ride up-town, and bore
them off in triumph. But the indignity and damage done to The Ark left
him sore and wrathful and after he had disposed of his passengers he
sought Willard and between them they made out a letter to Mr. Connors,
acquainting him with what had happened and notifying him that they
would hold him responsible for the amount of the repairs. Mr. Connors
replied promptly the next morning. He regretted that the accident had
occurred but was assured by both his drivers that the automobile had
caused the damage by running suddenly into the back of his wagon.
That being the case, he had no intention of paying for any repairs to
the automobile. As soon as he found out how badly his wagon had been
damaged he would let them know and would expect a prompt settlement!
Tom was hopping mad and wildly insisted on placing the matter in the
hands of a lawyer. But Willard pointed out that as no one but Connors’
two drivers and Tom himself had witnessed the affair, and as Pat Herron
and Johnny Green would swear to the same tale, Tom’s chance of being
believed was small.

“We’ll just have to take our medicine and smile,” said Willard. “I
don’t believe Connors will ever send us a bill――――”

“If he did I wouldn’t pay it!” declared Tom.

“And the best thing we can do is have Jimmy Brennan fix things as best
he can. I don’t believe it will show much, anyway. I guess we got out
of it pretty well, Tom.”

A day or two later Jimmy straightened things out and Tom finally became
pacified. About this time they received a reply to their application to
the Police Board. They had not expected to get what they had asked for
and so were not greatly disappointed. The Board informed them that in
its judgment there was no demand for added carriage facilities in the
part of town petitioned for and that their application was denied. If,
however, the petitioners cared to apply for a stand at the corner of
Main and Chestnut Streets their application would probably be favorably
considered.

“Main and Chestnut Streets!” growled Tom. “Why, that’s half-way to the
station! No one would ever find us there!”

“They know that,” replied Willard. “That’s why they offer it to us. I
hope Connors chokes! Well, I guess that keeps us out of town, Tom.”

“Indeed it doesn’t,” said Tom stoutly. “I’ve been thinking.”

“You want to be careful this hot weather,” observed his chum with an
attempt at humor.

“They won’t let us stop the car anywhere,” Tom went on, disregarding
the slur, “but they can’t prevent us from driving up and down the
street, can they?”

“I don’t suppose so. Why?”

“Well, then what’s to prevent me from taking the car up to the hotel
just before train time and driving it back and forth slowly? If anyone
wanted to get in I’d have a right to stop, I suppose.”

“Of course you would! Why didn’t we think of that before? But――but it
will use up a lot of gasoline, won’t it?”

“Not much. Besides――” and Tom looked savage――“I’d waste a gallon a day
to get ahead of Connors!”

“And I’d pay for it out of my own pocket!” declared Willard. “That’s
what we’ll do, then, Tom. We’ll try it for a few days, anyhow. We’ll
start to-morrow morning and I’ll go with you.”

It was a rather tedious and trying job keeping The Ark on the move
all the time, but it answered the purpose apparently quite as well as
keeping it stationary. If a person wanted to ride down in the car, he
didn’t hesitate to use his lungs, and Tom, always with an eye on the
hotel entrance, drew up and took him in. The policeman on the beat
watched proceedings closely and was plainly disgruntled, and had Tom
given him the least excuse he would have swooped down and made trouble.
But Tom was too wise to stop The Ark for an instant save to pick up or
set down passengers.

Quite often now Willard took the wheel and Tom sat anxiously beside
him, ready to take control in an emergency. Tom could be as cool as
a cucumber just as long as he was running the car himself, but when
Willard, or even Jimmy Brennan, had the wheel he was as fidgety as
a hen with one chicken! However, it was not long before Willard
convinced him of his ability to run the car without mishap, and there
finally came a day――Tom had contracted a sore-throat and was forced to
keep to the house for twenty-four hours――when Willard conducted The Ark
to and from all trains without aid or supervision.

When Connors’ hack had been running a week under the new twenty-five
cent tariff it became evident that in meeting the price of his rival
the livery man had not succeeded in attracting any more business. The
Ark continued to get at least half of the train arrivals. There were
times when Tom had to refuse passengers, since the car held only five
persons normally and only six by crowding. Many times Willard walked
back from the station because there was no place for him in The Ark, or
was picked up half-way to town by Tom after the latter had delivered
his fares. The commercial travelers were the best and steadiest patrons
of Benton and Morris, and as the summer progressed their number
increased. The boys got to know some of them very well, to know them
and like them. And the traveling salesmen liked the two boys and made
it a point to ride with them. Many of them took a genuine interest
in the venture and whenever they came to town had to know just what
progress had been made in their absence. There’s a saying to the effect
that a satisfied customer is the best advertisement, and the boys
discovered the truth of this, for quite frequently a stranger would
step off the train with:

“You the fellow that has the automobile? Bill Jones told me I was to
ride up with you. Here’s my grip, and I’ve got a couple of trunks to go
up, too.”

One stout and jovial hardware drummer whose suitcase held the
inscription “J. Fawcett Brown,” and who was known to his friends as
“Spiggot,” had humorously named the automobile “the Irish Mercedes,”
and the name stuck. “Well, son, how’s the Irish Mercedes going these
days?” a passenger would inquire as he yielded his grip. “Haven’t broke
the record for a dirt track yet, have you?”

Of course all the patrons of The Ark were not commercial travelers.
Prosperous looking gentlemen inclined toward stoutness were taken to
the paper mill or the cotton mill; hurried, worried-looking men were
whirled over to the railroad shops; and now and then a lady traveler
stepped with evident misgiving into the car and was whisked to some
