residence on The Hill. And so, by the middle of August, the Benton and
Morris Transportation had just about all the business it could handle
during the day, while in the evenings it grew to be the exception when
The Ark was not out on the road with a party.

And then there was the picnic. It was a big affair, gotten up every
summer by the mill employees and participated in by many others. Tom
made four trips to Wyman’s Grove in the afternoon and in the evening
brought seven carloads home. The trolley line ran within a quarter of
a mile of the picnic grounds and most everyone made use of the special
cars provided by the railway company. But there were plenty who were
eager to pay a quarter of a dollar to ride out in style in The Ark
and Tom could have filled the car on each trip had it been four times
bigger. The picnic added over ten dollars to the company’s assets at
the cost of two or three gallons of gasoline, and both Tom and Willard
were well satisfied.

Tom’s scheme to take folks to the ball games did not result so
successfully and after trying it one Saturday afternoon it was
abandoned. The ball field was not very far from town and the young
folks, who made up the bulk of the audiences, preferred to walk and
save their quarters.

About this time, to be exact, on the fourteenth of August, the Benton
and Morris Transportation Company held its first monthly business
meeting and declared a dividend!




                             CHAPTER XVIII

                           DIVIDENDS FOR TWO


The meeting was held after supper in the little office at Mr. Morris’
cabinet shop. When Tom arrived Willard had his book and papers spread
out on the desk and was all ready for business.

“I thought,” said Willard, “we’d better come around here where we
wouldn’t be interrupted. You can’t do anything like this at home
because Grace is always butting in. Do you want to go over this
yourself or shall I do it?”

“You do it,” answered Tom, pushing his hat back from his forehead and
perching himself on the sill of the open window. It was a hot, still
night, with a wonderful big round moon throwing black tree shadows
across the quiet street. From somewhere around a corner came the tinkle
of a piano and, further up the street, Mr. Canton’s setter puppy was
barking ferociously at the moon. But for these sounds, each of which
seemed a part of the summer night, all was silence, the silence of a
stifling August evening when not a leaf stirs and even the moonlight
seems hot. Willard ran a finger around inside the low collar he wore
and assumed the rôle of treasurer.

“I tell you right now, Tom,” he began, “you’re going to be surprised,
awfully surprised.”

“I am, eh?” asked Tom uneasily. “All right. I can stand it. Go ahead.”

Willard cleared his throat. “The books show,” he began in an important
tone, “that we have taken in during the period from July twelfth to
August eleventh inclusive, the space of one month, thirty-one days――――”

“Oh, cut the speeches, Willard,” begged Tom. “It’s too hot.”

“That we have taken in,” continued Willard, unruffled, “from――er――all
sources the sum of $187.75.”

“What! How much? Say it again!”

“One hundred and eighty-seven dollars and seventy-five cents,” repeated
Willard in triumph.

“Gee!” gasped Tom. “How’d we do it?”

“It’s all here, day by day. Let’s see. On station trips we made
exactly a hundred and twelve dollars. We took in sixty-five dollars on
evening――er――rentals and ten dollars and seventy-five cents the day of
the picnic. Total, one hundred, eighty-seven, seventy-five!”

“Great Scott! Why, that’s――that’s over two thousand dollars a year!
Are you sure you’ve got it right, Will?”

“Look for yourself,” said Willard offendedly. Tom dropped from the
windowsill and followed Willard’s finger as it passed down the pages,
pausing at totals and pointing out “Forwards.”

“Seems all right,” murmured Tom. “Say, we’ve been doing some business
lately, haven’t we?”

“You bet. Look at this day, August eighth; nine dollars and twenty-five
cents from station work and six dollars from an evening party; total,
fifteen dollars and twenty-five cents! That’s the best day of all,
although the picnic day came pretty close; thirteen-fifty. We didn’t do
much station work that day.”

Tom whistled softly and sank into a chair. “A hundred and eighty-seven!”
he muttered. Then, his voice dropping: “I suppose, though, we’ve had to
spend a lot of that,” he said questioningly.

“Ye-es, a good deal. Gasoline costs such a lot, Tom. Wish we could get
along without it! Here’s what we’ve disbursed.”

“Dis――what?” asked Tom.

“Spent, you idiot! Gasoline, seventeen dollars and thirty cents――――”

“That isn’t so much!”

“Repairs and supplies other than fuel, eight dollars and sixty cents;
printing, including sign-painting, three dollars and eighty-five cents;
one tire and one tube, twenty-two dollars and fifty cents――――”

“I’d forgotten that,” murmured Tom sadly.

“Expense of trip to Providence, two dollars and twelve cents;
incidental expenses, one dollar and sixty-five cents. That’s all.”

“And――and how much does it leave us?” asked Tom anxiously.

“We’ve expended fifty-six dollars and two cents. Take that from one
hundred, eighty-seven, seventy-five and it leaves one hundred and
thirty-one dollars and seventy-three cents.”

“Do you mean to say we’ve got all that left?” demanded Tom.

“No, because we paid Saunders twenty dollars, you see.”

“That’s right.”

“So we’ve got on hand one hundred and eleven dollars and seventy-three
cents. Or, anyway, that’s what we ought to have.”

“Haven’t we?” asked Tom anxiously.

Willard shook his head. “We’ve only got a hundred and ten, ninety-eight.
We’re seventy-five cents shy, Tom. I’m sorry. I’ve put away every cent
and kept strict account, but――――”

“Shucks, what does seventy-five cents matter when we’ve got all that
money? And――and maybe you made a mistake in your figuring.”

“Maybe I didn’t!” exclaimed Willard indignantly. “More likely you
forgot to hand some money over some time, Tom.”

“I might have,” mused the other. Then, triumphantly: “I’ll tell you
where your seventy-five is!” he cried. “Remember the chap who went away
without paying Mr. Duff for his two sample-cases and bag?”

“Of course! I forgot that. I suppose that ought to go down to profit
and loss.”

“Loss, I’d say. Although we’ll get it out of him the next time he comes
to town. I remember him, all right. He had red hair and freckles and
wore a pink shirt. Looked like――like a sunset, he did.”

“Hope he doesn’t change his shirt,” laughed Willard, as he corrected
his account. “We might not recognize him.”

“I’d know him as long as he didn’t dye his hair! Well, what are we
going to do with all that money, Will? I suppose we’d better pay back
some of what we borrowed, hadn’t we?”

“I should think so. Suppose we pay your father his fifty and I’ll take
twenty-five.”

“But you put in a hundred and twenty-five and dad only put in fifty,”
Tom demurred. “You take fifty and we’ll pay dad twenty-five. That’s
fairer.” And after some discussion it was settled that way. “Then,”
said Tom, “we have about thirty-five left, haven’t we? What’ll we do
with that?”

“We’ll let twenty-five of it remain in the treasury,” replied Willard,
“and declare a dividend of five dollars apiece. How’s that?”

“All right,” said Tom. “How do you do it?”

“Do what?”

“Why, declare a dividend.”

“You――you just do it,” laughed Willard. “We’ve declared it. To-morrow
we’ll each take five dollars out.”

“What’ll we do with it?” asked Tom.

“Anything you like. Spend it; save it; anything.”

“Oh, I see. It’ll be our own, you mean?”

“Of course!”

“Think of that!” murmured Tom. “Say, that’s fine, isn’t it? Why, I
didn’t suppose I’d get anything out of it for a long time! I wonder――――”

“What?” asked Willard as the other paused.

“I wonder what I’ll do with it. I guess I’ll start an account at the
bank, a savings account. Did you know that they pay you three per cent.
