interest, Will? What’s three per cent. on five dollars?”

“A cent and a half,” answered Willard, smiling.

“Is that all?” Tom’s face fell. “I’ve a good mind to spend it, Will!”

“There’s one thing we’ve forgotten,” observed Willard later, “and that
is that I haven’t any license to run that car, Tom. I guess I’d better
have one, eh?”

“I should say so! Gee, they might have nabbed you that day you were out
alone! I didn’t think about it. Anyway, it’s only two dollars.”

“I know, and I’ll pay it myself――out of my dividend.”

“Indeed you won’t! The――the firm will pay it.”

“Pshaw, it isn’t worth while! What’s two dollars?”

“Well, it’s almost as much as we started business with,” replied Tom
dryly. “The firm paid for my license and it ought to pay for yours.
To-morrow we’ll get an application and fill it out. Now let’s get out
somewhere where it’s cool. That gas makes it hotter than the dickens in
here.”

They locked up and, together, Willard carrying his books and papers,
sauntered down the street and crossed to Logan Court, pausing at the
corner a moment to further infuriate the setter puppy. From the blind
end of the court it was possible to sneak through the Widow Thomas’
side yard, scale a fence, and drop into the Willard premises. Mrs.
Thomas, however, objected to such proceedings, and so it was incumbent
on them to proceed cautiously, a fact which lent the thing quite a
glamour of adventure. To add to their difficulties, the widow was
entertaining friends on the front porch and they had to duck behind
the lilac hedge as they passed and then slip quietly through the side
gate. All went well until Tom, confused by the black shadows on the
ground, walked into a hose-reel. His cry of surprise was loud enough
to be heard on the porch and they had just time to dodge into the dark
shrubbery along the fence before the sound of scraping chairs told them
that the widow and her friends were investigating. Behind the shrubbery
they waited, doubled up with laughter. Finally, quite distinctly across
the yard, came the widow’s voice: “I guess it’s that Morris boy,” she
said resignedly. “He seems to think my place is a public highway. I’m
going to speak to his father about him the first thing in the morning.”

“You’ll get it,” whispered Tom, laughingly.

“She always says that,” Willard replied, “and never does it. Come on;
they’ve gone back.”

They emerged from the shadows and went further along, until they were
opposite the Morris’ back-yard. Then a hard scramble over a high board
fence and they were safe. Unfortunately, though, Willard dropped his
book and it took them several minutes to rescue the papers from among
the currant bushes. In celebration of the fine showing of the company,
Grace Morris was called on to prepare lemonade, and the three sat on
the porch in the moonlight and sipped the cooling beverage and nibbled
cookies until long after their proper bedtime.




                              CHAPTER XIX

                         MR. DUFF GIVES NOTICE


A few days later Willard received his license to operate the automobile
and for the next fortnight the affairs of the company went swimmingly.
Then one morning Mr. Duff informed them in his dreamy, detached way
that he wouldn’t be able to handle any more baggage for them.

“Connors was to see me last night and said as how I was interferin’
with his business,” explained the expressman. “So I guess I won’t be
workin’ any more for you.”

“Interfering with his business!” exclaimed Willard. “Well, why
shouldn’t you interfere with it if you want to?”

Mr. Duff shook his head and blinked. “He don’t like it.”

“Well, what of it? Haven’t you a perfect right to make a living?”

“I s’pose so,” sighed Mr. Duff.

“Then why do you let him tell you what you shall do or sha’n’t do?”
demanded Tom impatiently. “Gee, you’d think Connors owned this town!”

Mr. Duff viewed him thoughtfully for a moment. Then, “Well, he owns the
house I’m a-livin’ in, anyway,” he said reproachfully.

“Oh, he does!”

“Yep.” Mr. Duff nodded slowly. “And he says he might have to raise my
rent five dollars a month on me. Says if his business don’t improve
he’ll have to.”

“I see.” Willard nodded his head thoughtfully. “And he doesn’t want you
to haul any more baggage from the station, eh?”

“That’s what he said.”

“Why, confound it, you make more than five dollars a week doing our
work,” exclaimed Tom. “I should think you could afford to pay him more
rent if he asks it.”

But Mr. Duff shook his head. “He might keep on a-raisin’ of it,” he
said dejectedly. “And he might put me out. No, sir, I don’t want to do
anythin’ to anger Mr. Connors. ’Tain’t wisdom!”

And all the boys could say had no effect. Mr. Duff resolutely severed
his connections with the Benton and Morris Transportation Company then
and there, and the boys trundled off up the street with a new problem
confronting them.

“I suppose,” said Willard finally, “that we might have our passengers
hand over their trunk checks at the hotel. Connors couldn’t refuse to
take them then.”

“Why couldn’t he? He’s got Tom Meechin on his side, hasn’t he? Besides,
that wouldn’t be business. No, sir, if we carry passengers we’re
obliged to look after their baggage, and that’s all there is to it.
Isn’t there anyone else in this town that does expressing or jobbing?”

Willard shook his head. “I don’t think so. I made inquiries just after
we hired Duff; the day he got Mrs. Miller’s wardrobe trunk mixed up
with that drummer’s sample case. I guess the only thing for us to do is
to find a horse and wagon of our own. Wouldn’t there be room for them
in your stable?”

“I suppose so. There’d be plenty of room for the horse, anyway, and I
guess we could get the wagon in alongside the car if we had to. But
they’ll cost like anything, won’t they?”

“We might be able to hire them,” suggested Willard. “How would it do to
advertise?”

“All right, I guess. You’d have to drive the thing, Will.”

“I wouldn’t mind. It would be rather fun.”

“Maybe, but you couldn’t handle those big trunks, I’ll bet.”

“I couldn’t?” asked Willard confidently. “I’ll bet I could! Gus Tinker
would give me a hand at the station and the porter would help me at the
hotel.”

“How about when it was a private house? I’d like to see you wrestling
with a trunk like that wardrobe thing of Mrs. Miller’s you were just
talking about.”

“I’d manage somehow,” responded Willard doggedly. “Besides, you aren’t
obliged to carry trunks up any stairs. I’d just dump ’em at the door.”

“Yes, and have the women scolding you! If we have a horse and wagon
we’ll have to hire someone to drive it, Will, and handle the trunks.
That’s all there is to it. Meanwhile, we’ve got to think what to do for
the present. There’ll be trunks on the 11:34 as like as not.”

They were silent for a while. Tom drew The Ark up in front of his house
and poked the switch off with his foot and they sat there in the shade
of a big maple and thought hard. It was Tom who finally broke the
silence.

“Jerry Lippit’s father has a horse, hasn’t he?” he asked suddenly.

“Yes, a sort of a horse,” answered Willard. “But I don’t believe he’d
let us have him. He’s about a thousand years old; the horse, I mean.”

“I didn’t think you meant Mr. Lippit,” replied Tom sarcastically.
“There isn’t any harm in asking, anyhow. Let’s find Jerry and get him
to ask his father.”

“I don’t believe they have a wagon, though,” said Willard, as he
descended to crank the engine.

“We can find a wagon somewhere easily enough. Saunders has a lot of
second-hand ones and I guess we could rent one if we wanted to.”

Jerry Lippit, however, was not at home, and the boys spent the
better part of an hour tracking him down. They finally discovered
him at Spider Wells’, half-way up The Hill. Jerry and Spider were
concocting marvelous beverages on the back porch with the aid of much
ice, a bowl of sugar, three lemons and a bottle of vanilla flavoring
extract. Tom and Willard sampled the concoction, and, from motives of
diplomacy, voted it fine. Then, resolutely declining second helpings,
they unfolded their story, and Jerry was instantly filled with wild
enthusiasm. Likewise Spider.

“Great!” exulted Jerry. “You can take Julius Cæsar, of course! And
we’ll get a wagon from Saunders and Spider and I will drive it. That’s
dandy!”

Tom viewed Willard in dismay, but the latter never batted an eyelid.
“Fine!” he agreed. “Only thing is, I’m afraid you fellows will get
tired of it and then we’ll be just where we are now. Unless you’d
still let us use the horse. Of course we’ll pay for him.”

“We aren’t going to get tired, are we, Spider? Anyhow, if we do, you
can still have Julius Cæsar. I’ll ask father this noon. How much shall
