I say you want to pay for him?”

“I don’t know,” replied Willard. “You see, Jerry, we’d feed him and
look after him, and that costs a good deal. I guess you’d better let
your father fix the price.”

“All right. I guess he’ll be glad to have someone take the old horse
off his hands and use him for his keep. He’s talked lots of times about
selling him, but we’ve had him so long he don’t hardly like to do it,
you see. Why, I suppose we’ve had Julius Cæsar ’most twenty years!”

“Great Scott!” gasped Tom. “How old is he?”

Jerry shook his head. “I don’t know,” he answered vaguely. “Maybe
thirty or forty.”

“Pshaw,” said Spider, “horses don’t live that long, ever; do they,
Will?”

“None of mine ever did,” replied Willard gravely. “Can he――can he go,
Jerry?”

“You bet he can! ’Course, he ain’t awfully fast now, you understand,
but he used to do a mile in two-ten――――”

“Oh, what a whopper!” shouted Spider.

“Well, two-something,” amended Jerry untroubledly. “Maybe it was
two-forty.”

“And maybe it was two-sixty,” suggested Tom laughingly. “Never mind,
though, if he can get from the station to town in half an hour he will
be good enough for us. We’ll look you up after dinner, Jerry, and see
what your father says. You try to make him let us have him.”

“Don’t you worry,” replied Jerry, pouring himself a third tumblerful
from the glass pitcher. “When he understands that I’m going to drive
him it’ll be all right.”

“Say, I’m going to drive him sometimes, ain’t I?” demanded Spider. “You
said――――”

“Of course,” answered Jerry impatiently from behind his glass. “Only
dad would feel easier in his mind, you see, if he knew I was in charge.
I’ll let you drive him――sometimes.”

Spider didn’t look quite satisfied with the tone of that promise, but
made no further protest, and Willard asked them if they wanted to take
a ride before The Ark went to the station to meet the 11:34. They did,
and after hurriedly finishing the contents of the pitcher and returning
the vanilla bottle to the kitchen cupboard in a somewhat surreptitious
manner, Spider and Jerry tumbled into the back of the car.

“Spider doesn’t believe that I ran this one day,” observed Jerry
presently as they rolled down the gentle slope of Walnut Street. “I
did, didn’t I, Tom?”

“You did,” responded Tom grimly. “And it’s a wonder you didn’t kill
yourself and smash the car up!”

Spider laughed tauntingly until Jerry pummeled him into silence.
“Anyway,” said the irrepressible Jerry, “you’ve got to own I did mighty
well considering I’d never driven before, Tom. I did do mighty well,
didn’t I, Will?”

“You did,” answered Willard gravely. “The way you just didn’t smash
into the back of that dray was a――a marvel of skill, Jerry. I hope you
can drive a horse as well as you can drive an automobile.”

Jerry grinned. “Sure I can. You see there isn’t so
much――what-you-call-it――mechanism to a horse, Will. If you want a horse
to stop you say ‘Whoa, you slab-sided, knock-kneed giraffe!’ and he
whoas.”

“He does?” asked Willard. “If I was a horse and you said that to me I’d
run away and break your silly neck! Is that the way you talk to Julius
Cæsar?”

“Oh, it doesn’t matter what you say to him,” replied Jerry carelessly,
“because he doesn’t hear you. He’s sort of deaf, you know.”

“I hope he isn’t blind, too,” said Tom pessimistically as he guided The
Ark around the corner into Main Street.

“Not much,” answered Jerry cheerfully. “One eye’s pretty good yet.”

“He must be a peach!” said Spider witheringly. “How many legs has he
got left, Jerry?”

“Four or five; I forget which. Say, Tom, go through Spruce Street so
George Connors can see us, will you?”

“What for?”

“So that I can make a face at him,” responded Jerry promptly. “I told
him the other day I could ride in your car any time I wanted to, and he
said I couldn’t. I just want to show him I can.”




                              CHAPTER XX

                       INTRODUCING JULIUS CÆSAR


Fortune aided them that day. Only three passengers descended from the
11:34, of whom one walked to his destination, one was beguiled into
the hack and the third, a commercial traveler well known to Tom and
Willard, rode uptown in The Ark. Tom had qualms when the man passed
over two checks, but investigation proved the baggage to consist of a
couple of sample-cases which could be easily transported in the car.
The 1:57 brought more fares but no trunks, while, as for the 2:06, that
train fairly deluged the station with travelers and baggage. Luckily,
however, Jerry and Spider had already assumed their duties. Mr. Lippit
had announced himself quite willing to have Tom and Willard use Julius
Cæsar for his keep. He was to remain in his own stable, Tom and Willard
were to provide feed and bedding, Jerry was to continue his duties as
stableman, and the wagon, when secured, was to be kept in the Lippits’
back-yard under the partial protection of a big apple-tree. (The
carriage-room already held Mr. Lippit’s side-bar buggy and a two-seated
sleigh, and there was no possibility of squeezing the wagon in.)
Finding the wagon was the next thing, and they went around to Saunders’
Carriage Works. Five second-hand express wagons of various sizes and
styles were exhibited, but Mr. Saunders would not consider renting. In
the end a rather small, light wagon was selected. In spite of the fact
that the body had recently been painted over with a coat of dazzling
green and the running-gear with an equally vivid vermillion, it was
plain to be seen that the vehicle had been much used. Tom expressed a
doubt as to its being strong enough to carry more than one trunk at
a time, but the carriage man assured them that you could put a dozen
trunks in it without hurting it. As a matter of fact, there wasn’t room
for more than eight, no matter how you arranged them, but they let
that pass. Mr. Saunders begged them to observe the springs, which, he
declared, were as strong as they made them. They looked terribly slight
to the boys, as did the axles and the wheels, but they were willing
to be convinced; and, besides, the green and red paint certainly was
stunning!

“Thirty dollars takes her,” said Mr. Saunders cheerfully, “and she’s a
rare bargain at that figure, I can tell you.”

“How much did it cost when it was new?” asked Willard doubtfully.

“Ninety dollars, and cheap at that! Look at the stuff in her. Nothing
cheap about her――except the price!” And Mr. Saunders laughed heartily
at his joke. There was a dismal silence for a minute, during which the
boys walked around and around, viewing the wagon from every possible
angle. Finally,

“Would you mind taking one of the wheels off?” asked Willard quietly.
“I’d like to see the axles.”

“Certainly sure,” replied Mr. Saunders. But he seemed to lack
enthusiasm, a fact quickly explained when, having returned with the
wrench and jack, he slid a rear wheel off. The axle was pretty badly
worn. Mr. Saunders made light of it, however. “’Course it’s worn a
little,” he said. “I ain’t sayin’ she’s perfectly new, am I?”

“Let’s look at a front axle,” suggested Willard. In the end they saw
them all, and there was a whispered council between them. Then,

“We’ll give you fifteen dollars for it,” said Willard firmly.

Mr. Saunders, tightening a nut, laughed harshly.

“I guess you ain’t lookin’ for a wagon, boys; you want a wheel-barrow.
Fifteen dollars wouldn’t hardly pay for the paint on her!”

“All right,” said Willard. “That’s all we’d be willing to pay for that
wagon. She won’t last more than six months, I guess.”

The carriage dealer became indignant, expatiated on the merits of the
vehicle and ended by chopping off five dollars from the first price.
Willard shook his head indifferently and offered eighteen. Mr. Saunders
shrugged his shoulders and started away with his implements. Tom
whispered to Willard to offer him twenty. Willard shook his head. “It’s
his turn now,” he replied.

Having deposited the jack and wrench where they belonged, Mr. Saunders
wandered back again. “I tell you what I’ll do, boys,” he said. “’Tain’t
like you were strangers. You’re customers of mine. I’ll meet you more
than half-way. Take her for twenty-two fifty.”

There was a moment of silence. Jerry was plainly anxious, for he had
set his heart on embarking in the express business. Tom twitched
Willard’s sleeve. “We’d better take it, hadn’t we?” he whispered.

“Tell you what we’ll do, Mr. Saunders,” announced Willard. “We’ll give
you twenty dollars and not a cent more. That’s all it would be worth to
us. What do you say?”

“All right, take her along. If all my customers were like you I’d be in
the poorhouse long ago.”

After that there was just time to hurry to the station in time for the
1:57 and so the rest was left to Jerry and Spider. “You don’t need to
come down until we tell you,” instructed Tom, “because there may not be
any trunks on these trains. But you get Julius Cæsar and haul the wagon
over to your place. Then, if there’s any work to be done, we’ll stop
