and let you know.”

But Jerry didn’t intend to miss anything, and somehow he and Spider
managed to hitch the horse to the wagon――luckily Mr. Lippit had a heavy
harness which just suited――and reach the station just as the 2:06
pulled out. Jerry held the reins and Spider sat proudly beside him.
Between the gayly-painted shafts ambled Julius Cæsar. Julius Cæsar had
been a dappled gray at one time, but now he was almost white. He was
short and ridiculously fat and had an absurd way of bobbing his head
up and down as he went. Still, as far as appearances were concerned,
Julius Cæsar was quite a success, and, hitched to the brilliantly-hued
wagon, made a good showing as he ambled and bobbed his way to the
platform. Pat Herron viewed the outfit with surprise and chagrin. Later
on his gift of repartee returned to him, but for a few minutes he was
plainly disconcerted. The Ark was quickly filled, Willard remaining
behind to superintend the loading of the baggage, and chugged away
uptown. Pat Herron, with a last lingering look at the express wagon,
followed after the automobile, and Willard, Jerry and Spider proudly
presented the checks and loaded four big sample trunks. That was a
triumphant journey uptown, Jerry guiding Julius Cæsar, Willard sitting
beside him, and Spider perched on a trunk. The horse was evidently
perturbed. Never before had he been hitched to such a vehicle, and,
doubtless, never before had he been called on to pull so heavy a load.
He resented it and showed it. Every few minutes he turned his head and
looked reproachfully at Jerry. Jerry was heartless.

“Go on, you old antiquity,” Jerry would bawl, with a flick of the whip.
“Think we’ve got all day to do this? Get ap, Cæsar!”

Whereupon Julius Cæsar, nodding a little more vehemently, would change
from a walk to a shuffling trot and maintain the latter until, in
his judgment, Jerry had forgotten his unseemly haste. It took them
fully twenty minutes to reach the hotel, but the journey was filled
with interest. Two small urchins tried to steal a ride and had to be
dislodged with the whip by Spider; Teddy Thurston followed them for
a block on Main Street and offered unsolicited advice on the subject
of driving, and finally descended to sarcasm and rude jesting; Mr.
Wells, emerging from the post-office, stared in alarmed surprise at
the sight of his son personally conducting a load of trunks through
the principal thoroughfare, and, just as they came opposite the Court
House, the fire engine and hose-reel swung around the corner of Pine
Street and almost demolished Julius Cæsar and the new wagon. By some
stroke of good luck Jerry managed to induce Julius Cæsar aside in the
nick of time and the engine passed harmlessly by about two inches from
their hubs! It was at that moment that Spider deserted. He explained
afterwards that he had thought he was going to be killed and had jumped
for safety, but the fact that he didn’t show up again until the fire in
Coakley’s cigar store on Spruce Street had been put out led the others
to believe he had preferred the attractions of the fire to the labor of
unloading trunks.

So the new wagon entered upon a career of usefulness, proudly driven
by Jerry, and protestingly pulled by Julius Cæsar, who, after months
of idleness in a box-stall, infrequently interrupted by an evening jog
through town in front of the side-bar buggy, could have held forth
eloquently on the subject of cruelty to aged horses had he been able
to talk boy-language! At the end of a week Tom and Willard found that,
after paying for feed for the horse and a dollar and a half to Jerry
for his services, they had profited to the extent of four dollars and
twenty-five cents, at which rate, as Willard pointed out, the wagon
would be paid for in a month!

Of course it wasn’t always plain sailing. There was the time when the
new wagon broke down on River Street and its load had to be transferred
to The Ark while it was hauled back to Saunders for a new wheel,
Saunders, to his credit be it said, performing the repair without
charge. And there was the time when Spider mutinied, refusing flatly to
break his back lifting trunks without ever being permitted the fun of
driving. That difficulty was smoothed over by Willard, who persuaded
Jerry to allow Spider to do the driving every other trip. But on the
whole the new arrangement worked very well and in the course of time
Julius Cæsar became reconciled to his new duties and seemed almost to
enjoy them. There were unnumbered verbal battles between Jerry and
Spider, on one side, and Pat Herron and Johnny Green on the other. They
supplied excitement and Jerry was very keen for them. He quite liked
matching his wits against Pat’s and usually came off victorious, as on
one occasion shortly after the new wagon began its duties, when Pat sat
on the box of the hack, Johnny lolled on the seat of Connors’ wagon and
Jerry and Spider drove magnificently up to await the 11:34.

“’Tis a fine horse ye have there,” remarked Pat kindly.

“’Tis so,” responded Jerry.

“And how old might he be, d’ye say?”

“He was four his last birthday.”

“Is it so? Four hundred! Think o’ that now! Sure, he don’t look more’n
a hundred and fifty!”

“I take such good care of him,” said Jerry sweetly. “Every now and
then he gets currycombed, you know.” Jerry glanced interestedly at the
horses hitched to the hack. “Ever try it, Pat, on those old cripples of
yours?”

“’Tis a fine way he has of knobbin’ his head,” returned Pat, ignoring
the aspersion. “By that you’ll be knowin’ he’s not asleep, likely?”

“N-no,” replied Jerry, “he always does that when he’s down here. Funny,
isn’t it? Seems as if he was sort of tired. Bet you anything, Pat, if
you went around the station he’d stop!”

“Is that so? Sure, he was born tired, that horse was. ’Tis a cryin’
shame to drive a beast like that. Let him be to die, why don’t ye?”

“Because if I did,” replied Jerry promptly, “you’d dig him out of his
grave and hitch him to your hack. Is it so that you never take the
harness off those nags, Pat, for fear they’ll fall to pieces?”

Whereupon Pat lost his temper and began to sputter, and before he could
think of a sufficiently caustic response The Ark chugged up and caused
a diversion.

There was another picnic about this time and the transportation company
made the most of it. As, however, it was a Sunday School affair, most
of the participants were children and the automobile was in less demand
than at the previous picnic. Tom and Willard both worked hard that day,
for Jerry and Spider deserted and journeyed to Providence with the
high school baseball team to witness the return match with Providence
Preparatory, and Willard had to drive Julius Cæsar and transport
baggage. To add to Tom’s troubles, a rear tire blew out half-way
between town and the picnic grounds and he was forced to lie up by the
roadside for half an hour while, with the doubtful assistance of two
elderly ladies and a twelve-year-old boy, the old tube and shoe were
taken off and new ones put on. Altogether that Saturday was a busy and
trying day, and Tom was glad to crawl into bed at nine o’clock. Just as
he was falling off into delicious slumber a low but insistent whistle
sounded under his window and he stumbled sleepily over to the casement.

“Tom! That you?” said Jerry’s voice.

“Yes; what is it?”

“I thought you’d like to know how the game came out. We lost, eleven to
three.”

“Glad of it!” growled Tom as, bumping into a chair on the way, he again
sought slumber.




                              CHAPTER XXI

                       JIMMY MAKES A PROPOSITION


“We were wondering, Jimmy,” said Tom, “if you knew of a fellow we could
get to run the car for us this winter. You see, it’s getting pretty
near time for school to open, and when I’m at school the only train
I’ll be able to meet is the 6:05; except, of course, on Saturdays. And
Willard’s going away to college pretty soon, you know. So we’ve either
got to find someone to drive the car or give up the business.”

“It would be a shame to do that,” replied Jimmy Brennan reflectively.
“I suppose you’re doing pretty well, aren’t you?”

Tom nodded. “We took in about a couple of hundred last month. And we’re
doing better this month, so far. So, of course, neither Willard nor I
want to give it up.”

“I should think not!” Jimmy tilted back against the window ledge in his
chair and looked thoughtful. It was a Sunday afternoon and the boys
had sought him at his lodgings on the lower end of Pine Street. From
the one window in the room they looked down across a number of spur
tracks toward the long, many-windowed buildings of the paper mills.
The house held the mingled odors of the Sunday dinner and factory
smoke. One never got very far from the smoke in Audelsville, anyway.
Jimmy’s room was small and rather bare, but everything about it looked
clean and neat, while Jimmy himself, dressed in his Sunday clothes
and without the usual smudges across his face, was quite a different
looking Jimmy from the one they were used to seeing. Tom viewed him
somewhat anxiously in the pause, while Willard’s gaze roved among the
many photographs that were tucked into the edge of the mirror above the
chest of drawers. At last,

“I don’t suppose I know anyone just now,” said Jimmy hesitatingly. “I
should think maybe you’d find someone by advertising in the Providence
papers.”

Willard’s gaze came away from the photographs. “Don’t suppose you’d
want to do it, Jimmy?” he asked.

Jimmy didn’t seem surprised. Probably he had suspected that the boys
had him in mind from the first. He shook his head. “I’d like the work,
I guess, but I don’t suppose you could pay me enough to make it worth
my while, fellows. You see, I get three-eighty a day at the shop.”

Tom sighed. “We were afraid that would be it,” he said. “You see, the
best we could pay would be――――” he looked questioningly at Willard.

“Twenty a week,” supplied the latter. Tom stared. They had agreed the
day before that they couldn’t afford to pay more than fifteen! Jimmy
shot a look of surprise at Willard.

“That would be over eighty a month,” he said. “There wouldn’t be much
in it for you fellows at that, would there?”

“No, not very much unless the business grew. But it would be better
