sir.”

“Sure you would――if you got enough money,” replied the other jovially.
“Anybody would. Now suppose I make you an offer for your automobile and
your good will, do you mind, you signing an agreement not to engage in
the business again. Suppose I offer you――offer you――well, say I offer
you five hundred dollars, eh? That’s worth considering, ain’t it?”

Tom scowled. “We make that much in two months,” he said.

“Not clear, you don’t,” was the reply. “Not after paying for gasoline
and repairs and all. But supposing you do, Benton, how long is it
going to keep up? When you’re paying another fellow to run your bus
for you how much are you going to make? Besides, I’ve been thinking it
might be a good plan to put on an automobile myself. They say they’re
considerably cheaper than horses.”

“I dare say there’d be room for both of us,” replied Willard smoothly.
“I don’t think we care to sell out, Mr. Connors.”

“Don’t, eh? That means I ain’t offered enough, I guess. Well, now, just
to show that I’m no haggler, boys, I’ll double that figure. I’ll pay
you an even thousand! What do you say now? I guess that’s some offer,
ain’t it? All I’m getting is a second-hand automobile that didn’t cost
more’n a couple of hundred, I suppose.”

“We’re not selling,” responded Tom emphatically.

Mr. Connors seemed surprised and pained. “Well, I’m sorry. You’ll never
get as good an offer again. And if you think I’ll raise the figure
you’re away off, boys. That’s my last word. A thousand or nothing.
Better think it over. There’s no hurry. A week from now will do. Think
it over, boys.”

“We don’t need to,” responded Willard firmly. “Tom’s right. We haven’t
any idea of selling out, sir.”

Mr. Connors sighed and frowned. “I’m sorry for you,” he said. “I’ll
tell you frankly, boys, that Bill Connors isn’t the sort to sit down
and see someone take his business away from him. I’ve been easy with
you so far but that ain’t saying I’m going to keep on standing around
and getting kicked. No, sir! I’ll give you a week to think it over.
After that――look out for squalls, boys!”

“We will,” said Tom shortly. “We’ve weathered quite a few of your
squalls already and I guess we can get through some more. I guess we’ll
be going now.”

“All right. I’m obliged to you for calling.” Mr. Connors was all
affability again. “Better think that over, though. A thousand dollars,
do you mind; and that’s a good deal of money for a couple of youngsters
like you to make. Think it over and let me know by this day week, boys.
Good day to you!”

“Good morning, sir,” murmured Willard. Tom strode out silently and said
nothing until they were in the car. Then,

“So that was what he wanted to see us about,” he muttered. “You were
right, Will.”

“Do you really think he will put on an auto himself?” asked Willard
uneasily.

“No, I don’t. He was bluffing. If he meant to do that he wouldn’t
bother with buying us out, I guess.”

“I suppose,” said Willard after a moment’s thought, “that a thousand is
a pretty good offer. I wonder if we’d do better to take it.”

“I wouldn’t take it from him if it was two thousand!” declared Tom
vindictively. “Anybody who’s done the mean things he’s done――――”

“He said he didn’t put Johnny Green up to that, and I sort of believe
him, Tom.”

“Maybe he didn’t,” grumbled the other, “but he fixed it so we couldn’t
get a stand on Main Street, didn’t he? Well, that’s enough. If he wants
to make trouble, let him! But there’s one thing we’ve got to do in a
hurry, and that is buy that truck and get started before he finds out
about it. I don’t know just what he could do, but I’ll bet he’d do it!
Let’s see Jimmy as soon as we can and hear what he thinks.”

And when Jimmy had heard what they had to tell him he said just one
word, and that was “Hustle!”




                             CHAPTER XXIV

                        JIMMY GOES TO NEW YORK


And Jimmy hustled.

He gave notice to his employers that he was leaving them on the 20th
of the month and then demanded two days off, or, more strictly, a day
and a half, since it was Friday when he scurried off to New York and
half of Saturday was his anyhow. Tom and Willard took him down to the
9:01, which would enable him to reach New York at about two in the
afternoon, and all the way to the station and while they waited for the
express they discussed Jimmy’s mission excitedly. It was agreed that
he was to purchase a used truck if possible, but if he did not find
any second-hand ones that suited him he was to negotiate for a new one
on the best terms obtainable and the firm would pay by installments
the difference between the seven hundred dollars which Jimmy bore
away with him in the shape of a New York draft and the price of the
car. Meanwhile the street railway company, as good as their word, had
started in on the old barn and the gap in the floor was being bridged
expeditiously with nice new, clean-smelling pine. The day after they
closed the deal with the real estate agent Tom, Willard, Jimmy and Mr.
Benton had gone to Lawyer Gilbraith’s office and an imposing document
had been drawn up. By the terms of the new agreement each of the three
partners was to share equally, while the name of the firm was changed
to the City Transfer and Garage Company.

It was during Jimmy’s absence that the boys held their second business
meeting and that Willard announced the earnings for the last month. The
station work had brought in $189 and rentals had added $74.50, a total
of $263.50. This represented an increase of $75.75 over the business of
the preceding month. Expenses had been $54.70, or $1.32 less than for
the previous period. The month’s profit was $208.80.

“Gee!” exclaimed Tom awedly. “If we can make that much now what will we
do when we get the truck?”

“We ought to add a third more, I think,” said Willard. “But there’s
one thing you must remember, and that is that the novelty of taking
automobile rides seems to be wearing off. We haven’t done much the past
ten days. Besides, when it gets cold folks won’t want to run around the
country at night.”

“That’s so, but there’ll be the garage business, and Jimmy seems to
think there’ll be more money in that than in the transfer part of the
thing. Anyhow, we haven’t any kick coming, I guess! Two hundred and
eight dollars! Gee!”

“And eighty cents,” laughed Willard. “Don’t forget the eighty cents.”

Tom waved a hand carelessly. “You may have that,” he said
magnificently. “What’s eighty cents to a millionaire?”

The next day Summer took her departure. You could feel the difference
the moment you stuck a foot out of bed in the morning. There was a
brisk, nippy west wind blowing from across the river, a good-natured
and rather boisterous wind that whipped the leaves from the trees along
the shaded streets, made you clap your hand to your yellowed straw hat
and seemed to cry: “Well, here we are again! Hello, folks! Shake hands
with my friend, Mr. Autumn!” And more than the sudden zest in the air
told of Fall. For when Tom chugged through Connecticut Avenue on his
way down town to collect passengers for the first train a boy hailed
him from a front porch and then joined him as he stopped The Ark. It
was Billy Younger.

“Say, Tom,” he announced, “George asked me to see you and find out why
you haven’t been out for practice. I told him I guessed you were too
busy running your auto and he said if you didn’t show up pretty soon he
didn’t want you.”

“Practice?” repeated Tom vacantly. “What kind――Oh, by Jove! I forgot
all about football, Billy! How long have you been at it?”

“Since Monday. We’re getting along pretty well, too. We play Finley
Falls a week from to-day. You don’t want to miss that. We’re going to
smear ’em, Tom, this year. Be out this afternoon?”

“Why――yes, I guess so. Three o’clock, is it? Nobody said anything to me
about it and I’ve been so busy I didn’t think. It doesn’t seem possible
it can be football time already!”

“’Tis, though. And it’s mighty near school time, too, worse luck! Only
eight days more vacation. I guess you’re pretty sure of right tackle
this year, Tom. Lyman’s too light for it and Berger’s a regular dub.
We’re going to have a dandy team, all right, but we need you, you know.”

Tom nodded. “I’ll be out to-day if I possibly can. Monday, anyway. Tell
Connors, will you?”

Billy shrugged his shoulders. “All right, but if you take my advice
you’ll show up to-day. George is sort of huffy with you, it looks like.
Had a row, you two?”

“N-no,” Tom hesitated. “No, we haven’t had any row. I suppose George
Connors is sort of peeved with Willard and me because we started this
automobile business and cut in on his dad.”

Billy whistled. “So that’s it? I wondered. He kind of acts as though
he wanted to keep you off the team. I don’t suppose the fellows would
stand for it, though. Still, George is captain and――well, if I were
you I’d try my level best to get out to-day. So long. How’s The Ark
running?”

“Fine, thanks. Much obliged. See you later.”

Tom went on thoughtfully. He was fond of football and was a good
player, and he wondered whether George Connors was going to hold his
grudge against him. If he did he could make it pretty hard sledding.
Tom had fairly earned the position of right tackle last season, and
he wanted to play it, but if Captain Connors was going to dislike him
there wouldn’t be much fun for him on the gridiron. Well, he’d go out
