for practice to-day anyhow. And he could soon tell how the land lay.

At noon Willard appeared breathlessly with a telegram from Jimmy. A
telegram was a good deal of an event in the lives of the boys and this
one worked them up to a high pitch of excitement. The message had been
sent from New York at eleven o’clock and said: “Back on eight-forty
to-night. Got it. Meet me at station.”

The rest of the day the boys speculated as to what “it” was. “That’s
the worst of telegrams,” complained Willard. “They never tell you
anything. They just get your curiosity up and stop short. Why the
dickens didn’t he tell us something about it?”

“Well, he used up his ten words, I suppose,” said Tom.

“What’s that got to do with it? Couldn’t he have spent ten cents more
and told us whether it was a new one or an old one and how much he paid
for it?”

“No, not for ten cents, I guess,” laughed Tom. “Anyway, we’ll know all
about it this evening.”

They went out to the field in The Ark in the afternoon, Tom, in a faded
and worn suit of football togs, to join practice, and Willard to look
on. George Connors’ greeting of the delinquent member of the squad was
decidedly ungracious.

“Why didn’t you stay away until Thanksgiving, Benton?” he demanded
sarcastically. “I suppose you think you’re so good you don’t have to
practice, eh? I don’t know as we need you very much now. We’ve been at
it a week.”

“Nobody said anything to me about practice,” replied Tom quietly. “If
you’d sent me word I’d been out.”

“Maybe you’d have liked me to come and fetch you in a carriage,”
sneered Connors. “You’re in the second squad to-day, Benton.”

All during practice and the short scrimmage that followed Tom was aware
of the captain’s scowling regard. In the ten-minute period of play
Tom messed up his opponent in the line, and, in spite of being out of
condition, played a hard game. But Connors was not to be placated and
Tom left the field with the knowledge that Connors had it in for him
and meant, if possible, to keep him out of the first squad. He confided
his fears to Willard, but if he expected sympathy he was disappointed,
for Willard lent only perfunctory attention and was too full of the
approaching arrival of Jimmy to take much interest in his chum’s
predicament.

Jimmy arrived on time and was conveyed to his boarding-house in the
car. During the ride and subsequently, when the three were seated about
the little bedroom upstairs, he reported the result of his journey.

“It was easy, fellows,” said Jimmy. “Say, there are more automobiles in
one block in New York than you ever dreamed of! And you can buy ’em at
all prices, too. I went right uptown yesterday when I got in and found
a friend of mine who’s demonstrator for a big company on Broadway and
he told me just where to go. I looked over five or six cars yesterday
and then went back this morning and had ’em demonstrated. And by ten
o’clock I’d bought one!”

“What’s it like?” asked Willard eagerly.

“A peach! They call it a light delivery truck. It’s got a body big
enough to hold twenty trunks, I guess, and it’ll haul a ton. It’s got
a two-cylinder engine, twenty-six horsepower; planetary transmission;
brakes on the rear hubs. It’s a Phelps. Made in Springfield,
Massachusetts, which is good in case we have to send for new parts;
won’t take long to get ’em; see? It has solid tires instead of
pneumatic, which is saving. There’s no top, but we can have a good big
rubber tarpaulin to pull over the load. There’s a small buggy top over
the seat, though, and an apron that folds away underneath it. It’s
painted green and yellow and is some swell little old truck, believe
me, fellows!”

“And――and was it a second-hand one, Jimmy?” asked Tom.

“Sure; run less than six hundred miles and in A1 condition. I pretty
near had it to pieces, fellows, and there isn’t a worn part about it.
It’s just been painted up fresh and it looks as good as new. And I
don’t know but what I’d just as soon have it as a new one, for it’s got
its kinks worn off.”

“How much?” demanded Willard anxiously.

Jimmy winked triumphantly, exasperatingly. “How much do you think,
Will?”

“Eight hundred, Jimmy?”

“Seven hundred,” suggested Tom.

“Nothing like it! Five hundred and eighty-five dollars, fellows, and as
pretty as a picture and runs like a breeze! Can you beat that?”

They couldn’t, and said so over and over. “It cost eleven hundred new,”
Jimmy went on. “It was bought by a grocery firm over in Brooklyn, the
fellow told me, and they ran it around for about three months and then
traded it in for a bigger car. Got a three-ton truck instead. It was a
rare bargain, and that’s all there is about it! And it will be along
about the middle of the week. They agreed to put it on the cars Monday.
I told ’em if it wasn’t here by Thursday we’d ship it back on ’em. I
just want to see Pat Herron’s eyes when he gets his first squint at it!”

“Who pays the freight, Jimmy?” asked Tom practically.

“We do. It’ll be only about fifteen dollars, they said. And we’ll still
have a hundred of that seven hundred left. How’s the garage coming on,
Tom?”

“Fine. They’ve got the old tracks all up and the carpenter said he’d
have the new flooring finished by to-night. By the way, they were going
to lug off that truck thing and I told them they couldn’t do it until
they’d talked with you.”

“That’s right. I guess we rented that with the building and we might as
well keep it. I don’t know as it will be any good to us, but it might
be. Have they done any glazing yet?”

“Glazing? Oh, the windows! No, not yet. I guess they’ll start on that
Monday. We’ll have to have a telephone, won’t we?”

“Yes. And electric light and power, too. I’ll see about that the first
thing Monday. We’ve got to get busy next week. What are you going to do
with that horse and wagon, fellows?”

“Well, the horse isn’t ours, you know. I suppose Saunders would give us
something for the wagon.”

“Better hold on to it, I guess,” said Jimmy thoughtfully. “There might
come a time when we’d need it. If this auto truck got out of whack
we’d be glad of something to haul baggage in. Probably we could find a
horse somewhere. We’ll stow the wagon in a corner of the garage for the
present. There’s another thing, too. Oughtn’t we to advertise pretty
soon and say that we are ready to do business? Quinby, the grocer,
has just ordered a delivery auto and I told him about the garage the
other day and he was mighty tickled. He was going to keep it with
Connors, but when I told him we’d have facilities for making repairs
and keeping it washed and all, you know, he said right off he’d keep it
with us. So there’s a starter!”

“I suppose an advertisement in the _News-Patriot_ would be a good
idea,” said Tom. “You know, anyhow, Will, we promised Spider we’d put
an ad in the paper the time he had his father publish that article
about us!”

“Yes, we could do that,” Willard agreed. “And we could have some cards
printed and distributed around town, too. How about a sign for the
garage, Jimmy?”

“We’ll cover it with signs,” replied Jimmy. “And we’ll get a painter
to put ‘C. T. & G. Co.’ on the car and the truck. We’ll do it right,
fellows. Well, I must turn in. I didn’t get much sleep last night.
Went to a theater and saw a peach of a show; ‘The Brigand’s Bride,’ it
was called. Then I dreamed of it all night! I’ll meet you to-morrow at
four-thirty at the garage, fellows. Good night.” Jimmy followed them to
the head of the stairs. “Say, what’s that noise down there?” he asked
suddenly. “Sounds as though you’d left your engine running, Tom!”

“Great Scott!” Tom bounded down the stairs three steps at a time and
disappeared through the front door, leaving Jimmy and Willard chuckling
on the landing.

“Another gallon of gas gone!” laughed Willard. “I guess Tom was too
excited to remember to turn off his switch. Good night, Jimmy. You
certainly did finely for us!”

“Just wait till you see it!” chuckled Jimmy. “She’s some little auto,
believe me, Will!”




                              CHAPTER XXV

                       THE ARK FINDS A NEW HOME


Jimmy had predicted a busy week, and Jimmy was right. Things began to
hum on Monday. Telephone and electric light connections were ordered, a
visit was made to the printer and a card written to be inserted three
times a week in the _News-Patriot_. All these things Jimmy engineered
with his partners’ assistance between four-thirty and six o’clock. On
Tuesday the car-barn was ready for occupancy, and, although their lease
did not begin until the first of the month, they were at liberty to
move in whenever they wished, and they “wished right away,” as Tom put
it. So Tuesday afternoon, when The Ark had delivered its last passenger
from the 1:57 and 2:06 trains, it was driven to Oak Street, and, with
a loud tooting of the horn, rolled through the first of the two wide
doors into the garage. It was quite a triumphal entry and the boys
regretted that Jimmy was not there to witness it. The pit was a thing
of the past, its former location indicated by a six-foot wide strip
of new planking that gleamed across the floor like a path of sunlight.
The old ties which had littered a corner were piled in the yard at one
side, the owners being glad enough to escape the labor of carting them
away.

The keeping of the old ties and the truck which had run across the
pit exhibited a trait in Jimmy which the boys soon discovered to be
at once amusing and canny. Jimmy never let anything get away from him
