if there was space to store it, and ultimately, perhaps to-morrow or
perhaps two years hence, he found a use for it. Thus, the old ties were
eventually utilized in many ways; cut into short lengths, they became
blocks to hold up front or rear axles when wheels had been removed;
split and chopped into kindlings they started the fires in the small
forge which Jimmy set up in the back yard the following spring. As for
the four-wheeled truck, it soon became one of the handiest features of
the garage. The flanged wheels were taken off and small wheels with
wide, flat treads were substituted. The two lengths of rail on top were
removed and a platform was built. Then they had a truck that could be
pushed easily about the floor and that would hold almost any weight
that could be placed upon it. Tom called it “Jimmy’s tender.” The rails
pulled up from the floor and left to rust outside the barn eventually
formed the framework of an improvised crane by which the body of an
automobile under repair could be lifted from the chassis, or, for that
matter, by which the whole car could be slung off the floor. Jimmy even
hoarded away the old spikes that had held the rails in place, and the
boys declared laughingly that he could take one of those spikes, heat
it in the forge, hammer it on the anvil and fashion it on the lathe
into anything from a rivet to a driving rod!

Later that Tuesday afternoon Jimmy appeared with a bag of tools and
set to work moving the bench from the back wall to a location under
the side windows. After that he hammered and sawed about in the little
box-like enclosure that was to serve as the office and soon had a
sloping shelf erected for a desk and a row of narrow shelves above it
to hold books and paper and such things. He came back after supper
that evening and worked until late by the light of a kerosene lantern,
while Tom and Willard alternately lent a hand or sat on the truck in
the flickering shadows and looked on admiringly. The telephone was put
in Wednesday morning and the electric light connections were made that
afternoon. Meanwhile a sign-painter, a personal friend of Jimmy’s, was
covering ten square feet of the side of the building toward Main Street
with a huge sign in black letters on a white ground which read:

                              CITY GARAGE
                    AUTOMOBILES STORED AND REPAIRED
                    GASOLINE――OILS――TIRES――SUPPLIES
                    OFFICE OF THE CITY TRANSFER AND
                             GARAGE COMPANY

Later a similar inscription appeared on the front of the building, and
one by one brightly colored signs of wood or metal began to flaunt
themselves, advertising the merit of Somebody’s Motor Oils or Somebody
Else’s Tires. But that was a good deal later. Almost every day now
Jimmy announced or exhibited the purchase of some necessary tool or
implement, and the prices at which he obtained things――many of them
second-hand but in good condition――amazed his partners. If Jimmy wanted
a certain kind of wrench he knew just where to go and bargain for it
and ultimately get it at his own price. Meanwhile the mail delivered
all sorts of letters and circulars to the firm. It was remarkable how
quickly news of the formation of the new concern reached the dealers
in automobile supplies. And it seemed still more remarkable how eager
those same dealers were to do business. In the evenings the three
members of the firm sat in the little office――they had only to turn a
switch now to flood the place with light――and discussed the brands of
oils or greases or tires to be handled by them.

“These Wells-Knight people offer a whole lot bigger discount than the
Octagon folks,” Willard would say. “Couldn’t we make more if we handled
their goods, Jimmy?”

“We’ll take some of their stuff,” Jimmy would reply, “but the Octagon
factory makes better tires, Will. It doesn’t pay to make too much
profit on a thing because it’s a fair bet the thing isn’t really good,
and we don’t want to sell a poor tire to a man and lose his trade when
we can sell him a good tire and have him come back again. Same way with
oils and greases and soaps. There are fifty firms putting those things
on the market, I guess, and it would take Solomon to know which ones
are the best, but at least we can steer away from those we know to be
too cheap to be good. I guess, take it by and large, we’d better deal
with the Red A folks on oils. They don’t offer as big a discount as a
lot of others, but everyone knows their goods; they’ve been making them
for six years or so, and that means something.”

By the end of that week salesmen were popping in on them at all hours,
salesmen with everything from a new kind of tire-pump to turn-tables
and gasoline tanks. One man even wanted to take their order for a
vacuum cleaner. He told them they would find it extremely handy for
getting the dust out of automobile upholstery. They were offered the
local agency for all sorts of things from spark-plugs to wind-shields.
And the offers didn’t stop at wind-shields, either, for there came
a letter one day that caused Jimmy to snap his fingers triumphantly
and exclaim: “Jumping Jupiter, fellows, why didn’t I think of that
myself?” The letter proved to be from a well-known firm of automobile
manufacturers in the middle West and it offered them the Audelsville
agency for their cars. When the boys learned of the commission to be
made on the sale of one automobile they opened their eyes very wide.

“Let’s do it!” exclaimed Tom. “Why, if we could sell three or four of
those cars a year we wouldn’t have to do anything else!”

“You bet we’ll do it!” replied Jimmy emphatically. “But we won’t handle
this line. We’ll find a car that sells at about a thousand dollars――――”

“But we wouldn’t make nearly so much, would we?”

“Not on one sale, but the point is that you can sell three cheap cars
to one high-priced one, and the more cars we can sell the more tires we
can sell, and the more gasoline and oil and everything else――including
repairs! Why the dickens I didn’t think of taking an agency I don’t
see!”

“There’s a fellow right over here on Linden Street who is an agent,”
said Willard, “but I don’t believe he does much.”

“Gooch?” Jimmy shrugged his shoulders expressively. “He hasn’t enough
life in him to sell a gold dollar for fifty cents! Besides, look at
the car he handles; nobody wants a Glynn car nowadays; it’s too heavy.
If we can get the agency for a car like the Day-Morton or Rugby, a car
that costs about six hundred for the runabout and nine or ten hundred
for a five-passenger touring model, we can sell three or four a year
now and a lot more later.”




                             CHAPTER XXVI

                          THE NEW MOTOR TRUCK


On Thursday the new motor truck arrived. Jimmy’s praise of it had not
been a whit too enthusiastic. To look at, it was a thing of beauty
indeed, at least from the point of view of its new owners, and as
for traveling――well, Tom had to own by the time they had completed
a triumphal journey up Main Street to the garage that, for power
and smoothness, it could run circles around The Ark! Tom viewed the
large wheels with solid tires doubtfully, but later he discovered
the wisdom of Jimmy’s choice, for there were no blow-outs to bother
with. Naturally the car didn’t glide quite as smoothly over the city
cobblestones as would a vehicle with pneumatic tires, but then one
didn’t use the truck for pleasure riding. After it was in the garage
Jimmy took up the floor-boards and exhibited and explained the engine,
which was tucked away under the front of the car. The square radiator,
which breasted the dash, held the maker’s name in brass letters and
Tom and Willard howled with anguish when Jimmy suggested removing it
to save the trouble of keeping it polished. The body was large enough
to hold eight trunks without piling them, while, if one cared to, one
could probably get on at least twenty. The dark green and pale yellow
looked very well together, and the little black leather top over the
seat glistened bravely. They were all delighted with it, and, although
Jimmy was aching to go over engine and wiring to make certain that all
was as it should be, Tom and Willard insisted on trying it out again;
which explains why a brand new green and yellow express wagon, without
a horse to draw it, ran around Audelsville for three-quarters of an
hour that Thursday evening, creating much interest in beholders!

Yes, that was certainly a busy week; so busy, in fact, that Tom got
out to football practice but two afternoons, Wednesday and Friday. On
Wednesday George Connors berated him soundly, Tom taking the scolding
meekly enough, since he knew he deserved it. But on Friday the captain
had even more to say, and Tom, while acknowledging to himself that
George Connors had plenty of excuse for complaint, was at last goaded
to anger.

“That will be about all, Connors,” he said at last. “I’m sorry I
haven’t been out to practice more, but I’ve been busy――――”

“Yes, stealing business from my father,” sneered Connors. “It’s a
wonder you couldn’t find a decent way to make money, Benton.”

“Anyhow, I guess you don’t want me on the team and I guess I don’t want
to be on it, so――――”

“You bet I don’t want you! I want fellows who will work and take an
interest. Shirkers――――”

“You know very well, Connors, that even if I haven’t done much
practicing I could go in to-morrow and play as well as any fellow here,
including you,” said Tom hotly. “You’ve got it in for me because I’ve
taken some of your father’s business away from him. You don’t care
whether I can play football or not. You want to get rid of me. That’s
all right. You’ll do it. I’m out of it.”

“You bet you’re out of it! We don’t need you, Benton――――”

“And you wouldn’t get me if you did!” And Tom stalked angrily away and
footed it back to town again feeling very badly used until his common
sense returned to him and showed him that, while Connors might have
been needlessly insulting, he had got not much more than he deserved.

He didn’t return to the garage, for Willard, who, with Jimmy, was
washing The Ark with the new overhead washer that had just been
installed, had agreed to meet the 6:05 train. Instead he went right
home, and, to his surprise, found his father, who usually did not
return until just before supper time, sitting on the porch with a
newspaper lying across his knees and a very troubled look on his face.

“Hello,” said Tom, “you’re home early, aren’t you? Anything wrong at
the office, sir?”

“N-no,” responded Mr. Benton, “nothing wrong there. I-I got tired
and came home. I’ve been looking through the paper,” he added rather
needlessly. Tom sat down on the top step, after a fleeting and puzzled
glance at his father’s worried countenance. “I see,” went on Mr.
Benton, “that you’re advertising in the _News-Courier_.”

“Yes, sir, we thought we ought to let folks know we were ready for
business.”
