
“Of course, of course,” murmured Mr. Benton. “I――I suppose you’re quite
interested in it, Tom.”

“Yes, sir,” answered the boy heartily, “I certainly am. Why, dad, we’re
going to make just gobs of money as soon as we get going well!”

“Hm; glad to hear it, son. We may need money before long.”

“Need mon――Look here, sir, there _is_ something wrong; I can see it by
the way you look, dad. What is it, sir?”

“Wrong? Nonsense! That is――well, yes, Tom, I am troubled a little. It’s
nothing important, though. It’ll work out, it’ll work out. Things
always do, you know――somehow.” He paused and frowned for a moment at
the lilac hedge that was fast losing its leaves. “Don’t you worry,
son,” he added after a while.

“Is there――can I help any way, sir?” asked Tom sympathetically.

His father shook his head slowly. “I hope not, Tom. I mean――no, there
isn’t anything you can do. Well, well! What time is it, I wonder. Must
be most time for supper, eh?”

“Not for a half-hour, sir,” answered Tom troubledly. He had never
seen his father look so tired and dejected before. At that moment
Jerry Lippit and Teddy Thurston came in at the gate to tell Tom quite
candidly what they thought of George Connors; and Jerry, especially,
could be exceedingly candid when he set out to be. Only the presence of
Tom’s father prevented Jerry from doing full justice to his subject.
But neither visitor received much encouragement from Tom.

“Oh, Connors was right enough,” said Tom. “I did stay away from
practice too much. I know that. I was so busy with the new truck and
the garage and things that I just couldn’t get out. It’s all right. I
wouldn’t want to play on the team anyhow with Connors feeling the way
he does toward me. It would be too unpleasant. Besides, I guess you
fellows will get on all right without me.”

“Yes, we will――_not_!” scoffed Jerry. “You were the whole right side of
the line last year, Tom! What are we going to do now? We’ll stand a fat
chance of winning anything, won’t we?”

But Jerry’s indignation soon wore itself out and he changed the subject
to the new motor truck.

“I suppose you won’t want me and Julius Cæsar now?” he said.

“Not after to-morrow, Jerry. You lose your job then.”

“Well, I’m sort of glad, because it takes a lot of a fellow’s time;
and now that football has begun――――” Jerry paused. “Say, I wonder if
Will would mind driving the wagon to-morrow afternoon, Tom,” he went
on. “You see, I want to go over to Finley Falls with the team. I guess
there isn’t much chance of my getting into the game, and if I do go
I’ll have to pay my own fare, but I’d sort of like to see it. Think
he’d mind, Tom?”

“No, I guess not. He isn’t going himself, is he?”

“Will? I don’t think so.”

“No,” said Teddy. “I asked him this morning. I offered to drive the
express wagon for him, Tom, but he insulted me.”

“What’s the matter with letting Spider do it?” asked Tom.

“Spider! Why, he’s going to the game, of course. You can’t keep Spider
away from a football game unless you tie him. He thinks there wouldn’t
be any game unless he was there!”

“All right, Jerry, you go ahead. I’ll tell Will about it. Besides,
I suppose if we had to we could get the baggage in the new truck
to-morrow. Jimmy won’t let us even look at it until he’s been all over
it with a fine-tooth comb!”

Tom returned to the garage after supper――it was less than four short
blocks from the house――and found Jimmy and Willard unpacking cases of
oil, grease and soap. They were stowing the cans on a series of shelves
back of the office which Jimmy had put up that afternoon. “I’ve been
thinking, Tom,” announced Jimmy, “that what we ought to do is build a
sort of bay-window in the office and show goods in it. It wouldn’t cost
much and there’s a good twelve feet between the front of the building
and the building line.”

“How would it do to put a little addition on that corner?” asked Tom.
“Say about eight feet by ten and then have a couple of big, broad
windows in front where we could show things? Then we’d use it for the
office and salesroom both, and there’d be a small door at the side,
so we could get in without going through the garage part. Of course,”
he added, laughing, “I’m not suggesting doing it to-morrow, because
I guess by the time we pay for the things we’ve ordered we’ll be
stone-broke, but――――”

“Some day we will,” said Willard decisively. “Fellows, we ought to own
this place and then we could fix it up as we liked; build on at the
back and front, too, if we wanted to.”

“Well, we’ve got enough room for now,” said Jimmy contentedly. “It’s a
lot of fun, though, planning what you’ll do later, isn’t it? Is that
the last of these boxes, Will? Now let’s check off. You have the list,
haven’t you? By the way, Tom, we get our first boarder next week.”

“Boarder?” repeated Tom, puzzled.

“Yes. Quinby’s car is due about Monday or Tuesday, and we’re to unload
it for him and bring it up here.” Jimmy squinted thoughtfully a moment.
“Unloading a car ought to be worth about five dollars, I guess.”

“If you get five dollars out of Mr. Quinby,” said Willard dryly,
“you’ll be doing well!”

Jimmy smiled untroubledly. “A man with a new automobile will pay any
price you ask him to――if it’s for the auto! And five dollars isn’t a
cent too much. In fact, I’m not sure we oughtn’t to ask him more!”

“Better start easy,” laughed Tom, “or Mr. Quinby will get scared and
send his car back to the maker! Now go on with your checking, you
loafers. It’s a good thing I came. If I hadn’t you’d have sat around
here doing nothing all the evening!”

“Is that so, sonny? Just cast your eye along those shelves and tell me
if you see anything,” replied Willard indignantly.

“There are a few cans there,” replied Tom.

“A few cans! There are six dozen cans, my young friend, and Jimmy and
I unpacked them all with our tender little hands. Suppose you get busy
and do something yourself. Get the wax crayon in the office and mark
the price on each can as we give it to you. I guess that’ll hold you
for a while!”




                             CHAPTER XXVII

                         THE ENEMY IN TROUBLE


There were stirring times at the station the next forenoon when Tom
and Willard drove The Ark down to meet the 11:34. The Audelsville High
School Football Team, resplendent in new uniforms and accompanied by
a score or so of enthusiastic friends, awaited the train and in the
interim indulged in the usual frolics to pass the time. Several of the
boys crowded about the automobile and expressed to Tom their regrets
in the matter of his retirement from the team. There were mutinous
grumbles against George Connors and gloomy predictions of defeat at the
hands of the Finley Falls enemy in the absence of Tom. Connors, casting
an occasional glance of amused contempt at The Ark, regaled a group
of his cronies with sallies of wit at the expense of the car. Jerry,
sporting a new and vivid blue necktie, Spider Wells, looking taller and
thinner than ever, and Teddy Thurston, with his perpetual grin, were
much in evidence on the platform. Teddy’s grin from the rear platform
of the last car seemed to float over the scene long after the train had
disappeared.

As it was Saturday Jimmy Brennan had a half-holiday and he devoted it
to work at the garage. They had determined to formally open the place
for business on Monday morning and there were still a dozen little
last things to be attended to. The sill of one of the swinging doors
was rotten and Jimmy laid a new one. Auger holes were bored through
the thick planks of the floor in the corner that was to be devoted to
washing to let the water through. More supplies had arrived, a shipment
of tires and tubes, and these were unpacked and stowed away. It had
been decided to prepare about twenty-five advertisements to be posted
in conspicuous places along the roads leading into Audelsville. For the
purpose Jimmy had obtained that many half-inch boards, ten inches wide
and sixteen inches long, and some heavy brown stencil paper. In the
latter, with the aid of a sharp knife, he cut out the legend: “PUT UP
AT THE CITY GARAGE, AUDELSVILLE.” Willard washed one side of the boards
with a thin coat of white paint and set them outside in the sun to dry.
As soon as the white had set, and as Jimmy had mixed plenty of drier
with it it didn’t take long, the stencil was placed on and a brush
dipped in black paint was flourished back and forth. The result was
quite astonishing, for the signs looked as though they had come from a
sign-painter’s. There was so much to be done and it was such fun doing
it that it was past supper time when Tom tore himself away, promising
to meet Willard there at seven o’clock――Jimmy was going to Graywich by
trolley that evening to visit a friend and spend the night――and hurried
home through the twilighted September evening. He expected to be late,
but when he reached the house he found his father and mother in the
sitting room. It only needed a glance at their faces to tell him that
something was wrong.

“I guess I’m late,” he said uneasily, when he had hung up his hat.
“There was so much to do at the garage, ma, that I didn’t know how late
it was.”

“Supper is late to-night,” replied Mrs. Benton. “I’ll get it now.
Your――your father has something to tell you, Tom, dear.”

Mrs. Benton hurried out to the kitchen and Tom took a seat and viewed
his father anxiously. Mr. Benton asked what Tom had been doing at
the garage, but seemed to pay small attention to the replies, and it
wasn’t difficult to see that he was postponing a disagreeable subject.
At last, however, “Tom, Connors was around to see me yesterday,” he
announced. “And――and I had a talk with him again to-day.”

“Yes, sir,” replied Tom, frowning expectantly.
