throttle wide open, and, with the searchlights boring a dim yellow path
into the gloom of early evening, The Ark bounced and lurched onward at
break-neck speed.

“What do you suppose we’re making?” gasped Willard once, above the hum
of the engine and the spatter of the exhaust. He was holding on to the
arm of the seat to keep from bumping against his companion.

“Thirty, anyway; thirty-five, I hope,” answered Tom, clinging to the
wheel. “It’s the best she can do, whatever it is,” he added grimly.

“We turn pretty soon, don’t we?”

“Yes, at the three corners. I’m watching for it. There it is now. Hold
hard!”

The car lurched wildly to the left, scraping the bushes beside the
way, and straightened out again in the middle of the road. “It’s plain
sailing now to Potterstown,” said Tom. “We’ll have to ask when we get
there. What’s he doing?”

Willard stole a look at the passenger. “Nothing,” he answered. “Just
sitting there. I guess he’s feeling pretty bad.”

A mile further on Willard gave voice to the fear that had been nagging
him all along. “Say, Tom, suppose we met a wagon or something. What
would happen? There isn’t room to pass, is there?”

“I don’t know,” answered the other calmly. “Hope so.”

He didn’t slow down his speed, however, and Willard, smothering a sigh,
leaned back again. The road wound through fields and woods, with here
and there, at long intervals, a farm-house showing a dim light from a
window or two. Fortunately there were no steep grades, although they
had been gradually ascending ever since leaving the river. But the
road was scarcely wide enough for two teams to pass save with caution
and Willard’s uneasiness was excusable. Luck, however, was with them
mile after mile. In the rear seat Mr. Connors, braced in a corner,
was bounced and shaken as the car swayed and bounded along with every
spring and bolt complaining. They were almost at Potterstown when
Willard gave a cry of warning. Into the field of light ahead, where
the narrow road turned to the right about the foot of a hill pasture,
suddenly came a vehicle.

Willard’s cry was drowned in the hoarse barking of the horn. There
was no time to stop, and Willard, clinging frantically to the seat,
closed his eyes. There was a shout of alarm beside him, the car tipped
perilously, there was a tremendous jolt and the sound of splintering
wood, and then――the steady whirr and hum of the car once more. Willard
opened his eyes. Ahead of them the road stretched straight and empty.

“Did we hit them?” he gasped.

“No, struck a rail fence,” came the untroubled answer. “Missed the
wagon by nearly a foot, I guess. There’s Potterstown ahead.”

Willard’s nervous bracing of his feet on the floor ceased as the car
lessened its speed to run into the little village, and he uttered a
sigh of relief. Tom heard it, perhaps, for he chuckled as he threw
out his clutch in front of the little hotel in the square and put his
brakes on hard.

“Which way to Finley Falls?” he called to a group on the porch.

“Straight on for a half a mile and then turn left at the old school
house. You can’t miss that. Keep on till you come to a big barn about
four miles along. Take the right hand road there and you’ll fetch the
Falls.”

“How far is it?” asked Tom.

“’Bout twenty-four miles, I guess; maybe a little more.”

“Thank you.” Tom turned to Willard. “What time is it now?”

Willard held the face of his watch to the dim light that came from the
open door of the hotel. “Twenty-eight minutes to eight,” he answered.

The car started again, the exhaust popping loudly, the gears rasped as
Tom pulled the lever and The Ark took up her journey once more. Tom ran
cautiously through the little village which strung itself out along
the straight road. Suddenly a hoarse and anxious voice sounded at his
ear.

“What time is it now?” asked Mr. Connors.

“Twenty-eight to eight, sir.”

“How far have we come?”

“About twenty-six miles, I think. I can’t say exactly because I don’t
know just how far it is to the Falls.”

“When will we get there?”

“We ought to be there in another hour, sir.”

“An hour more!” exclaimed Mr. Connors with a groan. “Can’t you go any
faster, Benton. I haven’t said anything about paying you for this, but
it’s fifty dollars, a hundred, if you get me there before――” his voice
broke――“before it’s too late!”

“I’ll do the best I can, Mr. Connors. I’ve run the car at her limit
most of the way and I’ll hit it up again as soon as we find the next
turn. And I guess that’s it ahead there now.”

He was right. A small, hip-roofed building, set in an apex between
diverging roads, with a flag-pole in front of it, was plainly the
schoolhouse. The Ark swung to the left and Tom’s fingers sought the
throttle lever. The Ark’s purr became a hoarse roar. Faster and faster
the car plunged through the darkness. It was cold now with the damp
chill of an autumn night, and Willard, his jacket buttoned tight to
his throat and the collar turned up, shivered as they flew down a long
hill, the air rushing past them like the blast from a giant fan. Tom
slowed up at the foot of the hill and half arose in his seat.

“Help me off with this coat,” he said as he worked one arm out.

“What for?” asked Willard, obeying while he questioned.

“It’s in the way. It’s too warm. That’s it. Steady! Now put it on.”

“But――――” began Willard.

“Hurry up!” commanded Tom impatiently. “You’re losing time!”

Willard, protesting, struggled into it, the car leaped forward again
and Willard staggered back into his seat.

“You’ll catch cold, Tom,” he said aggrievedly. “You’d no business doing
that.”

“Shut up. I’m all right. Running this thing keeps you warm enough. How
far did he say that barn was from the schoolhouse?”

“Four miles.”

They found it soon, a big white object that loomed ahead of them
through the blackness.

“Right,” reminded Willard. Tom nodded and the car swung around the
corner on two wheels and raced at a hill.

“About nineteen more, I guess,” said Tom, as they topped the summit and
dropped down the other side. “What are those lights ahead?”

“Maybe a wagon. Better go easy.”

“There isn’t time,” answered Tom, peering ahead. The lights came
flashing up to them, there was a jolt, and The Ark swept past a
crossing-tender’s shanty and over the railroad tracks.

“Gee, it’s lucky there wasn’t a train coming!” exclaimed Willard
thankfully.

“We’d seen the head-light,” Tom answered. “This road’s getting better,
isn’t it? Either that or I’m getting used to being shaken up. How much
gas do you think we had when we left?”

“About six or seven gallons. The tank was two-thirds full.”

“We won’t use more than four, I suppose. How about oil?”

“I didn’t look. The crank-case was filled Wednesday, though.”

“I guess there’s enough. We’ll soon know it if there isn’t.”

“What will happen?”

“She’ll heat up and smell like the dickens first.”

“Then what?”

“Stop, I guess. But we’ll be there by that time. She’s running like a
charm now, isn’t she?”

“I guess she never went as fast before,” replied Willard. “And I don’t
think I want to be in her when she does it again!”

“Do you suppose we can find a place to sleep when we get there? And a
place to put the car in?”

“Sure! There’s a big hotel there. And I guess they’ve got a stable, or
maybe, a garage. I wish we were there now. I’ll bet I’ll go to sleep
to-night without being sung to!”

“And I’ll bet I’ll be running this old car all night long in my
dreams,” answered Tom with a sigh. “My arm is as stiff as a poker right
now and has funny little pains in it.”

“Couldn’t I take the wheel a while? I guess I wouldn’t be any more
scared to run the car than I am sitting here watching for trouble!”

“I’ll stick it out,” answered Tom grimly. “There can’t be much further
to go.”

After that silence reigned for several miles. Occasionally a dim
reddish glow from the back of the car told them that Mr. Connors was
fighting nervousness with cigars. On and on, mile after mile, sped The
Ark, never once faltering in its task. Willard’s eyes became heavy,
