and once, forgetting his anxiety, he actually slumbered for a moment
between jounces! Then Tom’s voice startled him into full wakefulness.

“Finley Falls,” said Tom briefly.

Ahead of them the sky glowed as from the many lights of a city.
The road began to show small houses on each side, the homes of
truck-farmers. Then a factory loomed dark and formless at the left, and
they crossed a stream that fell over a dam and drowned for an instant
the noise of the car. And then, almost before they realized it, they
were in the outskirts of the town and The Ark was running smoothly in
the rails of a trolley road. Lights flashed from houses that clustered
closer and closer together. Vehicles began to dispute the crossings
with them and Tom was forced to slow down. Then cobblestones took the
place of dirt under the wheels, stores appeared, flooding the street
with light, and The Ark was at the end of its journey.

And yet not quite, for when Tom stopped in front of a brilliant
drug-store and Willard leaped out to make inquiries they found that
they must traverse the center of town before they could reach the
hospital. That was slow work, for it was a Saturday night and Finley
Falls was a busy place, and more than once Tom had to stop at crossings
or crawl along for rods at a time behind slow-moving trolley cars and
teams. But once through the shopping district Tom sped faster again and
a few minutes later The Ark was brought to a final halt in front of a
big building with many lighted windows and a wide doorway at the top
of a flight of granite steps. Mr. Connors was out almost before the car
stopped and was hurrying toward the entrance. But half-way up the steps
the boys saw him stop. He stood quite motionless for a moment. Then he
went on slowly and was lost to sight within the building.

Tom sighed. “I hope we got him here in time,” he said softly.

“So do I,” agreed Willard as he climbed stiffly out and stretched his
legs. “I wonder how long it took us, Tom.”

“What time is it now?”

“Just twenty-four minutes past eight.”

“We left at six-fifty-two. That makes it an hour and――and thirty-two
minutes. If it’s about fifty-two miles that’s pretty good time!
Especially as we had to crawl through the city when we got here!”

“We must have averaged pretty nearly thirty-five miles an hour!”
exclaimed Willard. “Gee, I didn’t think the old Ark could do it!”

“She did though. And she sounds like it. Hear that water boiling in the
radiator, will you?”

Tom, who had not left his seat since the start, pulled himself erect
with many groans and descended to the sidewalk, rubbing his arms to get
the kinks out. “I suppose,” he said, “we’re to wait here until he sends
word or something.”

At that moment a figure descended the steps and approached the car.
“That you, Tom Benton?” asked a voice.

“Yes, sir. Is that you, Mr. Chase?”

The Assistant Principal clapped a hand on Tom’s shoulder and seized his
hand in a tight clasp. “Tom, you saved the day, I guess,” he said.

“You mean――I got him here――in time, sir?”

“Yes. George had a pretty hard knock. I don’t know just how it
happened. It was about five minutes before the end of the last quarter,
and there was a pile-up in front of their goal. Perhaps he was kicked.
Anyhow, he was senseless when we got him off. We rushed him right
up here in a carriage and the doctors said it was concussion of the
brain. They put him to bed and examined him and said there’d have to
be an operation as the skull was fractured a little; trepanning, they
call it. But they wouldn’t operate without permission of his folks. I
sent another telegram then, but Mr. Connors’ wire, saying he had left,
reached me a few minutes later. There was nothing to do then but wait.
Half an hour ago the surgeon told me that if they didn’t operate inside
an hour it might be too late. There was a pressure on the brain, it
seems. They’re doing it now. There’s not much danger now, they say, but
of course the poor boy will be laid up for some time. It was lucky Mr.
Connors thought of getting you to bring him, Tom. If he had waited for
the train he wouldn’t have got here until after ten. You must have made
time, boys!”

“We did,” replied Willard with emphasis.

“I must get back,” said Mr. Chase. “As soon as the operation’s over
I’ll let you know. Then you’d better get back to the Mosely House;
that’s where I’m staying; and turn in. Of course, you aren’t thinking
of going back to-night?”

“No, sir, I guess about all we’re thinking about is bed,” said Tom. “If
you’ll let us know when he’s out of danger we’ll go along, sir. I’m
awfully glad it’s no worse than it is. Your telegram sounded pretty
bad, sir.”

“Things looked pretty bad when I sent it,” replied the teacher. “Well,
I’ll be back in a half-hour, I guess. You boys ought to be proud of
what you’ve done to-night!”

“I don’t know that I’m so proud of what _we’ve_ done,” said Tom as Mr.
Chase hurried back into the hospital, “but I’m certainly proud of what
the old Ark has done!”

And he patted the wheel affectionately.




                             CHAPTER XXIX

                         THE ARK SAYS GOOD-BYE


Three days later, at exactly 1:44 in the afternoon, The Ark chugged her
way decorously up to the platform at the station in Audelsville. In the
front seat sat Tom and Willard, the latter rather gorgeously arrayed,
as befitting one who is about to make his premier appearance at New
Haven as a Yale freshman! In the tonneau reposed a suitcase adorned
with a fresh, new label, bearing the inscription in a round, boyish
hand, “Willard Garford Morris, New Haven, Ct.”

Before The Ark had quite ceased its motion a deep honking sounded in
the direction of River Street and the boys turned to watch smilingly
and proudly the gallant approach of a green and yellow motor truck on
the seat of which sat Jimmy Brennan. The truck drew up behind The Ark
and Jimmy shut off the engine and climbed down.

“Well, here’s your trunk, Will. If you’ll give me your ticket I’ll
check it for you.”

“Thanks, Jimmy. Here you are.” And Willard rather importantly pulled
a pocket-book from the recesses of his jacket and produced his ticket.
“How does she run?”

“Run? She doesn’t run,” replied Jimmy proudly. “She glides! I’ll be
back in a minute, fellows.”

“It was a fine thing, our finding Jimmy,” said Willard reflectively.

“I should say so! We’d never have got anywhere without him.”

“I feel sort of guilty, though, running away and leaving you two
fellows to do all the work.”

“You needn’t. We’ll get on all right.”

“I know that. Only I feel as though I ought to be here helping. Anyway,
I’m glad we’re all straight with Mr. Connors. He was pretty decent,
wasn’t he, Tom?”

“Yes, he was. The thing I liked best about him was his not insisting
when we refused to take his money that morning.”

“Well, he was certainly grateful! He made me feel――feel like crawling
under the hotel verandah! And he was decent about your father, Tom.”

“Yes, but he should have been. I just told him we didn’t want his money
and were glad we’d been able to help all we could. And then I said that
if he really thought he owed us anything he could see that father got
his reappointment as postmaster.”

“And what was it he said? ‘You tell John that he needn’t move out of
there until he gets good and ready’; wasn’t that it?”

Tom nodded. “Something like that. What time is it getting to be?”

“There’s four minutes yet. I say, Tom, you’ll write real often, won’t
you? And let me know everything that’s going on. I wish we had more
money on hand. That’s sort of worrying me.”

Tom smiled. “Well, we haven’t much of a balance in the bank, and that’s
a fact. After we pay that insurance premium to-morrow, we’ll have
about twenty dollars to our name. But you needn’t worry about that.
We’ll make more fast enough. And about everything’s paid for up to
date,――except that you still have twenty-five dollars coming to you.”

“There’s no hurry about that,” returned Willard. “And let me know
how you get along with the football team, Tom. Wasn’t it fine, their
electing you captain?”

“Flattering,” laughed Tom, “but awkward. I told the silly chumps I
wouldn’t have time for it but they wouldn’t listen to me. Have you
heard how George is getting on?”

“Mother said he was doing finely. But it will be three or four weeks
before he can be out again. Is that the whistle?”

“Yes, you’d better get your bag out.”

But Jimmy returned just then and performed that service and the two
boys piled out of The Ark as the 1:57 came whirring into the station.
They conducted Willard across the platform and put him on the train.

“Good-bye, Tom! Be good to The Ark! Good-bye, Jimmy! Look after
yourself!”

“Good-bye, Will! Don’t forget to write to a fellow!”

“I won’t. See that you do. And tell me all the news. Make him write to
me, Jimmy, will you?”
