     ”    _Obv._ Head of Livia. _Rev._ Head of Iulia            ”      130

    ALTAR DEDICATED TO LARES OF AUGUSTUS IN B.C. 2 BY
        A _MAGISTER VICI_. (Uffizi Gallery, Florence)           ”      196

    AUGUSTUS AS SENATOR. (From the Statue in the Uffizi
        Gallery, Florence)                                      ”      212

    IULIA, DAUGHTER OF AUGUSTUS. (From the Bust in the
        Uffizi Gallery, Florence)                               ”      234

    LIVIA, WIFE OF AUGUSTUS. (From the Bust in the Uffizi
        Gallery, Florence) (Page 274)                           ”      234

    MÆCENAS. (From the Head in the Palazzo dei
        Conservatori, Rome)                                     ”      279

    P. VERGILIUS MARO. (From the Bust in the Capitoline
        Museum, Rome) (Page 284)                                ”      279




CHAPTER I

CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH, B.C. 63-44

    _Iam nova progenies_
    _cœlo demittitur alto._


[Sidenote: Birth of Augustus, Sept. 23, B.C. 63.]

In a house at the eastern corner of the Palatine, called “At the
Oxheads,”[1] on the 23rd of September, B.C. 63—some nine weeks before
the execution of the Catilinarian conspirators by Cicero’s order—a child
was born destined to close the era of civil wars thus inaugurated, to
organise the Roman Empire, and to be its master for forty-four years.

The father of the child was Gaius Octavius, of the plebeian _gens
Octavia_, and of a family that had long occupied a high position in the
old Volscian town of Velitræ. Two branches of the Octavii were descended
from C. Octavius Rufus, quæstor in B.C. 230. The elder branch had
produced five consuls and other Roman magistrates, but of the younger
branch Gaius Octavius, the father of Augustus, was the first to hold
curule office. According to the inscription, afterwards placed by his
son in the _sacrarium_ of the palace,[2] he had twice served as military
tribune, had been quæstor, plebeian ædile, iudex quæstionum, and prætor.
After the prætorship (B.C. 61) he governed Macedonia with conspicuous
ability and justice. He is quoted by Cicero as a model administrator
of a province; and he was sufficiently successful against the Bessi
and other Thracian tribes—constant scourges of Macedonia—to be hailed
as “imperator” by his soldiers. He returned to Italy late in B.C. 59,
intending next year to be a candidate for the consulship, but early in
B.C. 58 he died suddenly in his villa at Nola, in the same chamber as
that in which his son, seventy-two years later, breathed his last.[3]

[Sidenote: The mother of Augustus.]

The mother of the young Gaius Octavius was Atia, daughter of M. Atius
Balbus,[4] of Velitræ, and Iulia, sister of Gaius Iulius Cæsar. This
connection with Cæsar—already rising in political importance—may have
made his birth of some social interest, but the ominous circumstances
said to have accompanied it are doubtless due to the curiosity or
credulity of the next generation. The people of Velitræ, it is reported,
had been told by an oracle that a master of the Empire was to be born
there. Rumours, it is said, were current in Rome shortly before his
birth that a “king of the Roman people” was about to be born. His mother
dreamed strange dreams, and the learned Publius Nigidius prophesied the
birth of a lord of the world; while Catullus and Cicero had visions.[5]
But there was, in fact, nothing mysterious or unusual in his infancy,
which was passed with his foster-nurse at Velitræ. When he was two years
old his father, on his way to his province, carried out successfully an
order of the Senate to destroy a band of brigands near Thurii, survivors,
it is said, of the followers of Spartacus and Catiline. In memory of this
success his parents gave the boy the cognomen Thurinus. He never seems
to have used the name, though Suetonius says that he once possessed a
bust of the child with this name inscribed on it in letters that had
become almost illegible. He presented it to Hadrian, who placed it in his
private _sacrarium_.[6]

[Sidenote: The stepfather of Augustus.]

[Sidenote: The great-uncle of Augustus.]

[Sidenote: The first Triumvirate and its results.]

About B.C. 57 or 56[7] his mother Atia re-married. Her husband was L.
Marcius Philippus (prætor B.C. 60, governor of Syria B.C. 59-7, Consul
B.C. 56); and when in his ninth year Octavius lost his foster-mother he
became a regular member of his stepfather’s household. Philippus was
not a man of much force, but he belonged to the highest society, and
though opposed to Cæsar in politics, appears to have managed to keep
on good terms with him.[8] But during his great-nephew’s boyhood Cæsar
was little at Rome. Prætor in B.C. 62, he had gone the following year
to Spain. He returned in B.C. 60 to stand for the consulship, and soon
after the consulship, early in B.C. 58, he started for Gaul, from which
he did not return to Rome till he came in arms in B.C. 49. But though
occupied during the summers in his famous campaigns beyond the Alps, he
spent most of his winters in Northern Italy—at Ravenna or Lucca—where he
received his partisans and was kept in touch with home politics, and was
probably visited by his relatives. Just before entering on his consulship
he had formed with Pompey and Crassus the agreement for mutual support
known as the First Triumvirate. The series of events which broke up this
combination and made civil war inevitable must have been well known to
the boy. He must have been aware that the laurelled despatches of his
great-uncle announcing victory after victory were viewed with secret
alarm by many of the nobles who visited Philippus; and that these men
were seeking to secure in Pompey a leader capable of outshining Cæsar in
the popular imagination by victories and triumphs of his own. He was old
enough to understand the meaning of the riots of the rival law-breakers,
Milo and Clodius, which drenched Rome in blood. Election after election
was interrupted, and, finally, after the murder of Clodius (January,
B.C. 52), all eyes were fixed on Pompey as the sole hope of peace and
order. There was much talk of naming him dictator, but finally he was
created sole consul (apparently by a decree of the Senate) and remained
sole consul till August, when he held an election and returned his
father-in-law, Metellus Scipio, as his colleague.

[Sidenote: Pompey’s position after B.C. 52.]

The upshot of these disorders, therefore, was to give Pompey a very
strong position. He was, in fact, dictator (_seditionis sedandæ causa_)
under another name; and the Optimates hastened to secure him as their
champion. A law had been passed in B.C. 56, by agreement with Cæsar,
giving Pompey the whole of Spain as a province for five years after his
consulship of B.C. 55. As Cæsar’s government of Gaul terminated at the
end of B.C. 49, Pompey would have imperium and an army when Cæsar left
his province. He would naturally indeed be in Spain; but the Senate now
passed a resolution that it was for the good of the State that Pompey
should remain near Rome. He accordingly governed Spain by three legati,
and remained outside the walls of the city with imperium. The great
object of the Optimates was that Cæsar should return to Rome a _privatus_
while Pompey was still there in this unprecedented position. Cæsar wished
to be consul for B.C. 48. The Optimates did not openly oppose that wish,
but contended that he should lay down his provincial government and
military command first, and come to Rome to make his _professio_, or
formal announcement of his being a candidate, in the usual way.[9]

But Cæsar declined to walk into this trap. He knew that if he came home
as a _privatus_ there were many ready to prosecute him for his actions
in Gaul, and with Pompey there in command of legions he felt certain
that a verdict inflicting political ruin on him could be obtained. He
therefore stood by the right—secured by a law of B.C. 55, and reinforced
by Pompey’s own law in B.C. 52—of standing for the consulship without
coming to Rome, and without giving up his province and army before the
time originally fixed by the law. He would thus not be without imperium
for a single day, but would come to Rome as consul.

Here was a direct issue. Pompey professed to believe that it could be
settled by a decree of the Senate, either forbidding the holder of the
election to receive votes for Cæsar in his absence, or appointing a
successor in his province. Cæsar, he argued, would of course obey a
_Senatus-consultum_. But Cæsar was on firm ground in refusing to admit
a successor till the term fixed by the law had expired, and also in
claiming that his candidature should be admitted in his absence—for that
too had been granted by a law. If neither side would yield the only
possible solution was war.[10]

[Sidenote: Provocation to Cæsar.]

Cæsar hesitated for some time. He saw no hope of mollifying his enemies
or separating Pompey from them. His daughter Iulia’s death in B.C. 54
after a few years’ marriage to Pompey had severed a strong tie between
them. The death of Crassus in B.C. 53 had removed, not indeed a man of
much strength of character, but one whose enormous wealth had given him
such a hold on the senators that any strong act on their part, against
his wishes, was difficult. After his death the actual provocations to
Cæsar had certainly increased. The depriving him, under the pretext of
an impending Parthian war, of two legions which were being kept under
arms in Italy; the insult inflicted upon him by Marcellus (Consul B.C.
51) in flogging a magistrate of his new colony at Comum, who if the
colony were regarded as legally established would be exempt from such
punishment;—these and similar things shewed Cæsar what he had to expect
if he gave up office and army. He elected therefore to stand on his legal
rights.

[Sidenote: Civil war.]

Legality was on his side, but long prescription was in favour of the
Senate’s claim to the obedience of a magistrate, especially of the
governor of a province. There was therefore a deadlock. Cæsar made one
attempt—not perhaps a very sincere one—to remove it. He had won over
Gaius Curio, tribune in B.C. 50, by helping him to discharge his immense
debts. Curio therefore, instead of opposing Cæsar, as had been expected,
vetoed every proposal for his recall. His tribuneship ended on the 9th of
December, B.C. 50, and he immediately started to visit Cæsar at Ravenna.
He told him of the inveteracy of his opponents, and urged him to march
at once upon Rome. But Cæsar determined to justify himself by offering a
peaceful solution—“he was willing to hand over his province and army to
a successor, if Pompey would also give up Spain and dismiss his armies.”
Curio returned to Rome in time for the meeting of the Senate on the 1st
of January, B.C. 49, bringing this despatch from Cæsar.

The majority of the Senate affected to regard it as an act of rebellion.
After a debate, lasting five days, a decree was passed on January
the 7th, ordering Cæsar to give up his province and army on a fixed
day, on pain of being declared guilty of treason. This was vetoed by
two tribunes, M. Antonius and Q. Cassius. Refusing, after the usual
“remonstrance,” to withdraw their veto, they were finally expelled and
fled to Ariminum, on their way to join Cæsar at Ravenna. The Senate
then passed the _Senatus-consultum ultimum_, ordering the magistrates
and pro-magistrates “to see that the state took no harm,” and a levy of
soldiers—already begun by Pompey—was ordered to be held in all parts of
Italy.

[Sidenote: Cæsar crosses the Rubicon.]

Cæsar, informed of this, addressed the single legion which was with him
at Ravenna, urging it to support the violated tribunes. Satisfied with
the response to his appeal, he took the final step of passing the Rubicon
and marching to Ariminum, outside his province.

Both sides were now in the wrong, the Senate by forcibly interfering
with the action of the tribunes, Cæsar by entering Italy. An attempt,
therefore, was made to effect a compromise. Lucius Cæsar—a distant
connection of Iulius—visited him at Ariminum, bringing some general
professions of moderation from Pompey, though it seems without any
definite suggestion. Cæsar, however, so far modified his former offer
as to propose a conference, with the understanding that the levy of
troops in Italy was to be stopped and Pompey was to go to his Spanish
province. On receiving this communication at Capua Pompey and the consuls
declined all terms until Cæsar had withdrawn from Ariminum into Gaul;
though they intimated, without mentioning any date, that Pompey would
in that case go to Spain. But the levy of troops was not interrupted;
and Cæsar’s answer to this was the triumphant march through Picenum and
to Brundisium. Town after town surrendered, and the garrisons placed in
them by Pompey generally joined the advancing army, till finally a large
force, embracing many men of high rank, surrendered at Corfinium. Cæsar
had entered Italy with only one legion, but others were summoned from
winter quarters in Cisalpine Gaul, and by the time he reached Brundisium
Pompey had given up all idea of resisting him in Italy, and within
the walls of that town was preparing to cross to Epirus, whither the
consuls with the main body of his troops had already gone. Cæsar had no
ships with which to follow him. He was content to hasten his flight by
threatening to block up the harbour. Pompey safely out of Italy, he went
to Rome to arrange for his regular election into the consulship. Meeting
with opposition there[11]—one of the tribunes, L. Cæcilius Metellus,
vetoing all proposals in the Senate—he hastened to Spain to attack the
legates of Pompey, stopping on his way to arrange the siege of Marseilles
(which had admitted Ahenobarbus, named successor of Cæsar in Gaul),
and sending legati to secure Sicily, Sardinia, and Africa. Of these the
only failure was in Africa, where Curio was defeated and killed. This
province therefore remained in the hands of the Pompeians; but Cæsar’s
own successes in Spain, the fall of Marseilles, and the hold gained upon
the corn supplies of Sicily and Sardinia placed him in a strong position.
The constitutional difficulty was surmounted; he was named Dictator to
hold the elections, returned himself as consul, and, after eleven days in
Rome for the Latin games, embarked at Brundisium on January 3, B.C. 48,
to attack Pompey in Epirus.

[Sidenote: Iulius Cæsar master of the Roman world, B.C. 47.]

It is not necessary to follow the events of the next six months. Cæsar
had to struggle with great difficulties, for Pompey as master of the
sea had a secure base of supplies; and therefore, though Cæsar drew
vast lines round his camp, he could not starve him out. Pompey, in
fact, actually pierced Cæsar’s lines and defeated him in more than one
engagement. Eventually, however, Cæsar drew him into Thessaly; and the
great victory of Pharsalia (August 9th) made up for everything. Pompey
fled to Egypt, to meet his death on the beach by order of the treacherous
young king; and though Cæsar still had weary work to do before Egypt
was reduced to obedience, and then had to traverse Asia Minor to crush
Pharnaces of Pontus at Zela, when he set foot once more in Italy in
September, B.C. 47, he had already been created Dictator, and was
practically master of the Roman world.

[Sidenote: Octavius takes the _toga virilis_ and is made a pontifex, B.C.
48.]

In these momentous events the young Octavius had taken no part. At the
beginning of B.C. 49 he had been sent away to one of his ancestral
estates in the country. But we cannot suppose him incapable of
understanding their importance or being an uninterested spectator. His
stepfather Philippus was Pompeian in sympathy, but his close connection
with Cæsar kept him from taking an active part in the war, and he was
allowed to remain in Italy, probably for the most part in his Campanian
villa. From time to time, however, he came to Rome; and Octavius, who now
lived entirely with him, began to be treated with a distinction natural
to the near relative of the victorious dictator. Soon after the news of
Pharsalia he took the _toga virilis_, and about the same time was elected
into the college of pontifices in the place of L. Domitius Ahenobarbus,
who had fallen in the battle. This was an office desired by the highest
in the land, and the election of so young a boy, just entering upon his
sixteenth year, put him in a position something like that of a prince of
the blood; just as afterwards Augustus caused his two grandsons to be
designated to the consulship, and declared capable of official employment
as soon as they had taken the _toga virilis_.[12]

[Sidenote: Octavius’s relations with his parents and his great-uncle.]

The boy, who three years before had made a great impression by his
delivery of the _laudatio_ at his grandmother Iulia’s funeral, again
attracted much attention by his good looks and modesty. He became the
fashion; and when (as was customary for the pontifices) he presided
in a prætorian court during the _feriæ Latinæ_, it was observed to be
more crowded by suitors and their friends than any of the others. It
seems that the rarity of his appearance at Rome added to the interest
roused by his great-uncle’s successes. For his mother did not relax
her watchfulness. Though legally a man he was still carefully guarded.
