He was required to sleep in the same simple chamber, to visit the same
houses, and to follow the same way of life as before. Even his religious
duties were performed before daylight, to escape the languishing looks of
intriguing beauties. These precautions were seconded by his own cool and
cautious temperament, and the result seems to have been that he passed
through the dangerous stage of adolescence—doubly dangerous to one now
practically a prince—uncontaminated by the grosser vices of Rome. Stories
to the contrary, afterwards spread abroad by his enemies, are of the most
unsubstantial and untrustworthy kind.

[Illustration: THE YOUNG OCTAVIUS.

_Photographed from the Bust in the Vatican by Edne. Alinari._

_To face page 10._]

[Sidenote: Wishes to go to Africa with Cæsar.]

But though he seems to have quietly submitted to this tutelage, he soon
conceived an ardent desire to share in the activities of his great-uncle.
Cæsar had been very little at Rome since the beginning of the civil war.
A few days in March, B.C. 49, thirteen days in December of the same
year, were all that he had spent in the city. He was absent during the
whole of his consulship (B.C. 48) till September, B.C. 47. On his return
from Alexandria in that month, he stayed barely three months at Rome. On
the 19th of December he was at Lilybæum, on his way to Africa to attack
the surviving Pompeians. Octavius longed to go with him, and Cæsar was
willing to take him. But his health was not good, and his mother set
herself against it. The Dictator might no doubt have insisted, but he saw
that the boy was not fit to face the fatigues of a campaign. Octavius
submitted, quietly biding his time. He was rewarded by finding himself
high in his great-uncle’s favour when he returned in B.C. 46 after
the victory of Thapsus. He was admitted to share his triple triumph,
riding in a chariot immediately behind that of the imperator, dressed
in military uniform as though he had actually been engaged. He found,
moreover, that he had sufficient interest with Cæsar to obtain pardon for
the brother of his friend Agrippa, taken prisoner in the Pompeian army in
Africa. This first use of his influence made a good impression, without
weakening his great-uncle’s affection for him. Though Cæsar did not
formally adopt him,[13] he treated him openly as his nearest relation
and heir. Octavius rode near him in his triumph, stood by his side at the
sacrifice, took precedence of all the staff or court that surrounded him,
and accompanied him to theatres and banquets. He was soon besieged by
petitions to be laid before Cæsar, and shewed both tact and good nature
in dealing with them. This close connection with the wise and magnanimous
Dictator, inspired him with warm admiration and affection, which help
to explain and excuse the severity with which he afterwards pursued his
murderers.

[Sidenote: Octavius employed in civil duties, B.C. 46.]

In order to give him experience of civic duties, one of the theatres was
now put under his charge. But his assiduous attention to this duty in
the hot season brought on a dangerous illness, one of the many which he
encountered during his long life. There was a general feeling of regret
at the prospect of a career of such promise being cut short. Cæsar
visited him daily or sent friends to him, insisted on the physicians
remaining constantly at his side, and being informed while at dinner
that the boy had fainted and was in imminent danger, he sprang up from
his couch, and without waiting to change his dining slippers, hurried to
his chamber, besought the physicians in moving terms to do their utmost,
and sitting down by the bed shewed the liveliest joy when the patient
recovered from his swoon.

[Sidenote: Octavius follows Cæsar to Spain, B.C. 45.]

Octavius was too weak to accompany the Dictator when starting for
Spain against Pompey’s sons in December B.C. 46. But as soon as he was
sufficiently recovered he determined to follow him. He refused all
company except that of a few select friends and the most active of his
slaves. He would not admit his mother’s wish to go with him. He had
yielded to her before, but he was now resolved to take part in a man’s
work alone. His voyage, early in B.C. 45, proved long and dangerous;
and when at length he landed at Tarraco he found his uncle already at
the extreme south of Spain, somewhere between Cadiz and Gibraltar. The
roads were rendered dangerous by scattered parties of hostile natives, or
outposts of the enemy, and his escort was small. Still, he pushed on with
energy and reached Cæsar’s quarters near Calpe, to which he had advanced
after the victory at Munda (March 17th). Gnæus Pompeius had fled on board
a ship, but was killed when landing for water on the 11th of April, and
it was apparently just about that time that Octavius reached the camp.
Warmly received and highly praised for his energy by the Dictator, he
was at once admitted to his table and close intimacy, during which Cæsar
learned still more to appreciate the quickness of his intelligence and
the careful control which he kept over his tongue.

[Sidenote: Octavius accompanies his great-uncle to Carthage.]

Affairs in Southern Spain having been apparently settled (though as it
proved the danger was by no means over), Octavius accompanied Cæsar to
Carthage, to settle questions which had arisen as to the assignment of
land in his new colony. The Dictator was visited there by deputations
from various Greek states, alleging grievances or asking favours.
Octavius was applied to by more than one of them to plead their cause,
and had therefore again an opportunity of acquiring practical experience
in the business of imperial government, and in the very best school.

He preceded Cæsar on his return to Rome, and on his arrival had once more
occasion to shew his caution and prudence. Among those who met him in the
usual complimentary procession was a young man who had somehow managed to
make himself a popular hero by pretending to be a grandson of the great
Marius. His real name was Amatius or Herophilus, a veterinary surgeon
according to some, but certainly of humble origin. As Marius had married
Cæsar’s aunt Iulia, this man was anxious to be recognised as a cousin by
the Dictator. He had in vain applied to Cicero to undertake his cause,
and to Atia and her half-sister to recognise him. The difficulty for
Octavius was that the man was a favourite of the populace, of whose cause
Cæsar was the professed champion; yet his recognition would be offensive
to the nobles and a mere concession to clamour. Octavius avoided the
snare by referring the case to Cæsar as head of the state and family, and
refusing to receive the would-be Marius till he had decided.[14]

[Sidenote: Octavius at Apollonia, B.C. 45-44.]

He did not remain long at Rome however. Cæsar returned in September,
and was assassinated in the following March. And during that interval,
though he found time for many schemes of legislation, and of restoration
or improvement in the city, he was much employed in preparing for two
expeditions—calculated to last three years—first against the Daci or Getæ
on the Danube, and secondly against the Parthians in Mesopotamia. These
were the two points of active danger in the Empire, and Cæsar desired
to crown his public services by securing their peace and safety. For
this purpose six legions were quartered in Macedonia for the winter, in
readiness to march along the Via Egnatia to the eastern coast of Greece.
Returning from Spain Dictator for life, Cæsar was to have two “Masters
of the Horse.” One was to be Octavius, who had meanwhile been created
a patrician by the Senate.[15] But for the present he was sent to pass
the winter at Apollonia, the Greek colony at the beginning of the Via
Egnatia, where he might continue his studies in quiet with the rhetors
and other teachers whom he took with him or found there,[16] and at the
same time might get some military training with the legions that were
not far off. He was accompanied by some of the young men with whom he
habitually associated. Among them were Agrippa and Mæcenas, who remained
his friends and ministers to the end of their lives, and Salvidienus
Rufus, who almost alone of his early friends proved unfaithful.[17]

He seems to have led a quiet life at Apollonia, winning golden opinions
in the town and from his teachers for his studious and regular habits.
The admiration and loyalty of his friends were confirmed; and many of the
officers of the legions seem to have made up their minds to regard him as
the best possible successor to the Dictator.

[Sidenote: News of Cæsar’s assassination brought to Apollonia.]

In the sixth month of his residence at Apollonia, in the afternoon of
a March day, a freedman of his mother arrived with every sign of rapid
travel and agitation. He delivered a letter from Atia, dated the 15th of
March. It briefly stated that the Dictator had just been assassinated
in the Senate House. She added that she “did not know what would happen
next; but it was time now for him to play the man, and to think and act
for the best at this terrible crisis.”[18] The bearer of the letter could
tell him nothing else, for he had been despatched immediately after
the murder, and had loitered nowhere on the way; only he felt sure that
as the conspirators were numerous and powerful, all the kinsfolk of the
Dictator would be in danger.

This was the last day of Octavius’s youth. From that hour he had to play
a dangerous game with desperate players. He did not yet know that by
the Dictator’s will he had been adopted as his son, and was heir to the
greater part of his vast wealth; but a passionate desire to avenge him
sprang up in his breast, a desire strengthened with increasing knowledge,
and of which he never lost sight in all the political complications of
the next ten years.

[Illustration: Obv.: M. Brutus. Rev.: Two daggers and cap of liberty.

Obv.: Head of Augustus bearded as sign of mourning. Rev.: Divus Julius.

Obv.: Head of Agrippa. Cos III., _i.e._, B.C. 27. Rev.: Emblematical
figure and S. C. (_Senatus Consulto_).

Obv.: Head of Augustus with official titles. Rev.: Head of same with
radiated crown and the Julian star.

Obv.: Head of Sext. Pompeius. Rev.: The same with titles, Præfectus
classis et oræ maritime.

_To face page 16._]




CHAPTER II

THE ROMAN EMPIRE AT THE DEATH OF IULIUS CÆSAR

    _Vicinæ ruptis inter se legibus_
    _urbes Arma ferunt; sævit toto_
    _Mars impius orbe._


[Sidenote: Natural boundaries of the Roman Empire.]

At the death of Cæsar the Roman Empire had been for the most part won.
Egypt was indeed annexed by Augustus, though on a peculiar tenure, but
subsequent additions were in a manner consequential, the inevitable
rectifications of a long frontier. Such were the provinces of the Rhine,
the Alps, and the Danube as far east as Mœsia; and to a certain extent
the province of Galatia and Lycaonia (B.C. 25). The Rhine, the Danube,
and the Euphrates seemed already the natural boundaries of the Empire
on the north and east, the Atlantic Ocean on the west, and the African
and Arabian deserts on the south. And these boundaries, with occasional
modifications, and for the most part temporary extensions, continued to
the end.

[Sidenote: Its dangers.]

But though the greater part of this wide Empire was already won, it was
not all equally well organised and secured. Thus, in Northern Gaul,
there were still Germans and other enemies to be conquered or repelled;
in Southern Spain a son of the great Pompey was in arms; Macedonia was
continually subject to invasion by Getæ, Bessi, and other barbarians; the
Dalmatians and neighbouring tribes made Illyricum an uncertain member of
the Empire; in Syria, Cæcilius Bassus—an old officer of Pompey’s—was
defying Roman armies, and inviting the aid of the Parthians always ready
to cross the Euphrates into the Roman province.

[Sidenote: Cæsar’s precautions and preparations.]

To confront two of these dangers Cæsar had collected a large army in
Macedonia in the autumn of B.C. 45 to crush the Getæ, and then crossing
to Syria to force the Parthian to respect the frontier of the Euphrates,
or even to attack them in Mesopotamia. The former of these projects
was no doubt important for the safety of the Empire, and was in after
years successfully secured by Augustus and his legates. The latter was
more visionary and theatrical, meant perhaps to strike the imagination
of the Romans rather than to secure great practical advantage. After
Cæsar’s death Antony lost more than he gained by similar enterprises, and
Augustus always avoided coming into actual contact with the Parthians,
or attempting to extend his rule beyond the Euphrates. But there were
dangers within the Empire no less formidable than from without. Its
integrity had rested, and generally securely rested, on the loyalty
of its provincial governors to the central authority as represented
by the Senate, or, in the last resort, by the order of the people
expressed in a _lex_ or _plebiscitum_. It was the beginning of the
end when these governors used the forces under their command, or the
wealth and influence secured abroad, to defy or coerce the authorities
at home. Sertorius, Sulla, and Cæsar himself, had shewn that this was
not an impossible contingency. It was against this danger that, among
other reforms in the government of the Provinces, Cæsar’s own law had
provided that the tenure of a proprætor should be confined to one, and
of a proconsul to two years. But now that he was going on a distant
expedition, calculated as likely to occupy three years, he took other
precautions. Having provided for the chief offices at home,[19] he was
careful to see that the provinces should be held by men whom he believed
to be loyal to himself, and likely from their character and ability to
maintain their peace and security. Being Consul and Dictator, and his
_acta_ being confirmed beforehand by Senate and people, he could make
what nominations he pleased. A decree of the Senate was still taken
as a matter of form, but the old practice (often a farce) of drawing
lots for the provinces was abandoned;[20] Pompey’s law ordaining a five
years’ interval between curule office and a province was neglected, and
Cæsar practically nominated the governors. But it raises a doubt as to
the unfettered power or the insight of the Dictator that five of those
thus nominated were among the assassins on the Ides of March.[21] Nor
in other respects did his choice prove happy. The state of open war or
dangerous unrest which shewed itself in almost all parts of the Empire
after his death must be learnt by a review of the provinces, if we are to
understand the problem presented to Augustus and his colleagues in the
triumvirate, and the relief felt by the Roman world when Augustus finally
took the administration into his own hands, and shewed himself capable of
restoring law and order.

[Sidenote: (1) THE GAULS.]

The GAULS now included three districts, the status of which was somewhat
unsettled. (1) _Cisalpine Gaul_, that is, Italy between Etruria and the
Alps, was still nominally a province, though Cæsar’s law of B.C. 48
had granted full _civitas_ to the transpadane, as that of B.C. 89 had
to the cispadane, towns. It had formed part of Cæsar’s province from
B.C. 58 to B.C. 48, and he seems to have retained it until after the
battle of Pharsalia, when he appointed first Marcus Brutus and then C.
Vibius Pansa to it. Though part of Italy, and generally peaceful, it had
great military importance in case of an invasion from the north. After
March B.C. 44 it was to be in the hands of Decimus Brutus, who had long
served under Cæsar, and was regarded by him with special confidence and
affection. Antony’s attempt to wrest it from Decimus Brutus brought on
the first civil war after Cæsar’s death.

[Sidenote: (2) TRANSALPINE GAUL.]

(2) _Transalpine Gaul_ technically consisted of “the Province,” that is,
South-eastern France, from the Cevennes on the west to Italy, and from
the Lake of Geneva on the north to the sea. But since Cæsar’s conquests
there had to be added to this the rest of France, Belgium, and Holland
as far as the Rhine. No formal division into distinct provinces had yet
been made. In B.C. 49 Decimus Brutus, after driving out Ahenobarbus,
the governor named by the Senate, remained in command of the whole
till B.C. 45, when he returned in Cæsar’s train to Italy. But in the
course of these four years, or on his return, (3) Belgica was separated
from the rest and assigned to Hirtius, who, however, governed it by a
legate named Aurelius, without going there himself.[22] In the course of
the next year a farther division was made: Aurelius retained Belgica;
Lepidus, with four legions, was appointed to “the Province” (afterwards
called Gallia Narbonensis) together with Hispania Citerior; while L.
Munatius Plancus governed the rest, consisting of what was afterwards
two provinces—Aquitania and Lugdunensis. Plancus and Decimus Brutus were
named consuls for B.C. 42, and therefore their governorships necessarily
terminated at the end of B.C. 43, and might do so earlier. In the course
of B.C. 43 Plancus founded Lugdunum[23] (Lyon), which was afterwards
