under Antistius Vetus and L. Statius Murcus successively. He made some
agreement with the Parthians which secured their aid;[64] and though
Murcus was reinforced by Crispus governor of Bithynia, Bassus was still
unsubdued at the time of Cæsar’s death. There had been, therefore,
a double need for a strong man in Syria, and Cæsar had nominated C.
Cassius, the former defender of it against the Parthians. After Cæsar’s
death, however, Dolabella secured the passing of a law transferring Syria
to himself with the command against the Parthians. But some irregularity
in the auguries taken at the comitia gave Cassius a plausible excuse
for ignoring this law. Consequently when Dolabella entered the province
from the north, Cassius did so from the south. After some successful
movements in Palestine, Cassius induced Murcus and Crispus, and finally
Bassus himself, to hand over their legions to him, as well as Trebonius’s
legate, Allienus, who was bringing some legions from Egypt.[65] Thus
reinforced he shut up Dolabella in Laodicea and frightened him into
committing suicide. Syria therefore remained in the hands of Cassius; and
when he fell at Philippi it was vacant. In accordance with the agreement
made with Octavian after that battle it fell to the lot of Antony, who
retained it personally, or by his legates, till his death.

[Sidenote: (14) EGYPT.]

EGYPT was still an independent kingdom, ruled since B.C. 47 by Cleopatra.
Nevertheless, there was a considerable Roman force stationed in it,
partly left by Gabinius, when he restored Ptolemy Auletes in B.C. 57-6,
partly stationed there by Cæsar himself. They must have been somewhat
in the position of the English troops supporting the authority of the
Khedive, but prepared to resist all outside interference. So in this case
the Romans retained a preponderating influence, though with no legal
authority or right of raising revenue. These troops appear to have been
in a very disorderly state, and in B.C. 50 murdered two of the sons of
Bibulus who were among their officers.[66]

[Sidenote: (15) CYRENE AND CRETE.]

The district between Egypt and Roman Africa, called CYRENE, was once
joined to Egypt and then governed by a king of its own (B.C. 117). This
king (Ptolemy Apion), dying in B.C. 96 without issue, left his dominions
to the Romans. The Roman government took over the royal estates, and
placed a tax on the principal product of the country—silphium (valuable
for its medicinal qualities)—but did not organise it as a province.
The five principal cities[67] were allowed to retain a pretty complete
autonomy. But upon disagreements between these states breaking out, the
whole country in B.C. 74 was reduced to the form of a province governed
by a _quæstor pro prætore_.[68] Six years later (B.C. 68-7) complaints
as to the harbouring of pirates caused Q. Cæcilius Metellus to reduce
CRETE also.[69] When Pompey superseded Metellus in B.C. 67, he introduced
certain changes in the administration of both provinces, though there
is no proof that he combined them as was done at a later date. In B.C.
44 indeed, they were assigned separately—Crete to Brutus and Cyrene to
Cassius[70]—while Antony produced a memorandum of Cæsar’s directing that
Crete should be restored to liberty,[71] that is, should cease to pay
_tributum_. At the division of the provinces after Philippi both were
assigned to Antony, and he assumed the right some years later of forming
out of them a kingdom for his daughter by Cleopatra.

[Sidenote: The general disorders in the Empire.]

It will be seen therefore that at Cæsar’s death there was hardly any
part of the Empire in which there were not elements of mischief more or
less active. The most peaceful district was perhaps Greece, though it
managed to put itself under the frown of the triumvirs by sympathising
with Brutus, and later on under that of Octavian by sympathising with
Antony. The disturbances which most affected the actual residents in Rome
and Italy were those in Sicily and Sardinia, Gaul and Illyricum. The
man who should put an end to these would seem a saviour of society. The
struggles in the far East, though from a financial point of view they
were of considerable importance, would not loom so large in the eyes of
the Italians. We have now to trace the steps by which Augustus was able
to satisfy the needs of the state; to restore peace and plenty to Italy;
to organise and safeguard the provinces; and thus to be almost worshipped
as the visible guarantee of order and tranquillity.




CHAPTER III

THE INHERITANCE

    _Cui dabit partes scelus_
    _expiandi Iuppiter?_


[Sidenote: News of Cæsar’s murder brought to Apollonia, March, B.C. 44.]

The news of his great-uncle’s death reached Octavius at Apollonia in the
afternoon, just as he and his suite were going to dinner. A vague rumour
of some great misfortune quickly spread through the town, and many of
the leading inhabitants hastened to the house with zealous friendliness
to ascertain its truth. After a hasty consultation with his friends,
Octavius decided to get rid of most of them while inviting a few of the
highest rank to discuss with him what should be done. This being effected
with some difficulty, an anxious debate was carried on into the night.
Opinions were divided. One party urged Octavius to go to the army in
Macedonia, appeal to its attachment to Cæsar, and call on the legions
to follow him to Rome to avenge the murdered Dictator.[72] Those who
thus advised trusted to the impression likely to be made by Octavius’s
personal charm and the pity which his position would excite. Others
thought this too great an undertaking for so young a man. They argued
that the many friends whom Cæsar had raised to positions of honour and
profit might be trusted to avenge his murder. They did not yet know that
theirs were the very hands which had struck him down. After listening to
the various opinions Octavius resolved to take no decisive step until
he had reached Italy, had consulted his friends there, and had seen the
state of affairs with his own eyes.

[Sidenote: Octavius prepares to go to Italy, April, B.C. 44.]

Preparations for crossing were begun at once, and in the few days before
the start farther details of the assassination reached Apollonia. The
citizens begged Octavius to stay, putting all the resources of the town
at his disposal; and a number of officers and soldiers came from the
army with tenders of service, whether to guard his person or to avenge
the Dictator. But for the present he declined all offers. He thanked the
Apolloniates and promised the town immunities and privileges—a promise
which in after years he did not forget. He told the officers and soldiers
that he would claim their services at some future time. For the present
he did not need them: “only let them be ready when the time came.” The
conduct of the Martia and Quarta a few months later shewed that these
feelings were genuine and lasting.

Octavius had a poor vessel and a stormy crossing, but landed in safety,
probably at Hydruntum (_Otranto_), the nearest point in Calabria, and in
fair weather only a five hours’ voyage.[73] That fact and the state of
the wind may have influenced the choice of the port. But he was also too
much in the dark as to affairs in Italy to venture upon such a frequented
landing-place as Brundisium, where he might have found himself in the
midst of political enemies or hostile troops. From Hydruntum he went by
land to Lupiæ, rather more than half way to Brundisium. There he first
met some who had witnessed Cæsar’s funeral, had heard the recitation of
his will, and could tell him that he was adopted as Cæsar’s son, and
(with a deduction of a liberal legacy to the citizens) was heir to
three-quarters of his property,[74] the remaining fourth being divided
between Cæsar’s two other grand-nephews Q. Pedius and Lucius Pinarius.
He learnt also that the Dictator’s funeral, which by his will was to be
conducted by Atia, had been performed in the Forum amidst great popular
excitement, caused partly by the sight of his wounded body,[75] partly by
Antony’s speech, and had been followed by attacks on the houses of the
chief assassins, who, after barricading themselves for three days on the
Capitol, had found it necessary to retire from Rome, first to the villa
of Brutus at Lanuvium, and then to Antium,[76] in spite of the amnesty
voted in the Senate on the 17th of March.

[Sidenote: Octavian accepts the inheritance and name, May, B.C. 44.]

Though deeply moved by this story Octavian did not allow his feelings
to betray him into taking any false or hasty step. _Satis celeriter
quod satis bene_ was his motto now as in after life.[77] He went on to
Brundisium, having ascertained that it was not occupied by enemies, and
there received letters from his mother and stepfather confirming what he
had already heard. His mother begged him to join her at once, to avoid
the jealousies roused by his adoption. Philippus advised him to accept
neither inheritance nor name, and to hold aloof from public business.
The advice was, no doubt, prompted by affection, and was natural in
the circumstances. But though Octavian never blustered, neither did he
easily turn aside: he wrote back declaring his determination to accept.
His own friends henceforth addressed him as “Cæsar,” his full name now
being Gaius Iulius Cæsar Octavianus.[78] The adoption indeed was not
complete without the formal passing of a _lex curiata_; but though that
was delayed for more than a year, the new name was assumed at once. He
complied with his mother’s wish that he should visit her first, and he
soon had the satisfaction of feeling that though Philippus was still
opposed, her heart was with him in the manly resolve to sustain the great
part which Cæsar’s affection had assigned to him. Cicero mentions in a
letter of April 11th that Octavius had arrived in Italy, and on the 18th
that he had reached Naples. On the 19th Balbus—the Dictator’s friend and
agent—called on him and learned from his own lips his resolve to accept
the inheritance. On the 22nd Cicero met him at his stepfather’s villa
near Puteoli, and anxiously watched for any indication of his political
aims. He was only partly satisfied.

    “Octavius here treats me with great respect and friendliness.
    His own people addressed him as ‘Cæsar,’ but as Philippus did
    not do so, I did not do it either. I declare it is impossible
    for him to be a good citizen! He is surrounded by such a number
    of people who actually threaten our friends with death. He says
    the present state of things is intolerable.”[79]

It was not Octavian’s cue as yet to break openly with the aristocrats.
The first struggles for his rights were likely to be with Antony, in
which the aid of Cicero and his party would be useful. At the same time
he was too cautious and self-controlled to commit himself or betray his
real intentions, which remained an enigma to the emotional orator, who
hardly ever spoke without doing so. Cicero consoled himself by the
reflection that at any rate Octavian’s claims must cause a quarrel with
Antony. Yet he was indignant that this stripling could go to Rome without
risk, while Brutus and Cassius and the other “heroes” of the dagger could
not. Octavian’s journey to Rome was for the twofold purpose of giving
formal notice to the prætor urbanus that he accepted the inheritance, and
of making a statement of his intentions as administrator of the will at a
public assembly. For the latter he needed to be introduced to the meeting
by a tribune. For this service he relied on Lucius Antonius. All three
brothers were in office this year—Marcus consul, Gaius prætor, Lucius
tribune; and as supporters of the late Cæsar they could not in decency
refuse him this opportunity of declaring his sentiments.

[Sidenote: Octavian and M. Antonius.]

Octavian reached Rome in the first week of May, duly accepted the
inheritance, and was introduced to a _contio_ by Lucius Antonius about
the 10th of that month.[80] The speech was not satisfactory to the
Ciceronian party. He declared his intention to carry out his “father’s”
will as to the legacy to the people, and to celebrate the games at the
dedication of the temple of Venus promised by Cæsar. Preparations for
them were begun at once, two of the Dictator’s friends, Matius and
Postumius, being selected to superintend them.[81] But though confining
himself to expressions of veneration for his “father’s” memory, and
uttering no threats against any one, Octavian had not given up for a
moment his resolve to punish the murderers. The amnesty voted in the
Senate he regarded as a temporary expedient. All that was needed was an
accuser, and he did not mean that such a person should be long wanting.
But meanwhile his first business was to secure his own position and the
possession of Cæsar’s property. This at once brought him into collision
with Antony.

[Sidenote: The money at the temple of Ops.]

The financial arrangements of the late Dictator were to a great degree to
blame for this. He seems to have introduced the system of the _fiscus_,
though without the name known in later times: that is, large sums of
money were deposited in the temple of Ops to his order, separate from the
public _ærarium_ of the temple of Saturnus, and not clearly distinguished
from his own private property. It was as though a Chancellor of the
Exchequer paid portions of the revenue to his private banking account,
and were to die suddenly without leaving any means of distinguishing
between public and private property.[82] Cicero says that this money
(700,000,000 sesterces, or about five and a half millions sterling) was
the proceeds of the sale of confiscated properties,[83] and there was, it
seems, much other property in lands and houses from the same source. The
claim by an heir of Cæsar would be met by a double opposition—from the
government, which would regard the whole as public; and from the owners
or their representatives, who might have hopes of recovering parts of it.
For at Rome confiscation did not bar claims under marriage settlements,
or for debts secured on properties. The large sum at the temple of Ops
had been taken over entirely by Antony the Consul, nominally as being
public money, really—as Cicero affirms—to liquidate his own enormous
debts. It is very likely that Antony shared the spoil with others,
perhaps with his colleague Dolabella, and they may have satisfied their
consciences with some partial use of it for public purposes.[84] At
any rate it was not forthcoming when Octavian put in his claim. Even
in regard to such property as was handed over to him he was constantly
harassed by lawsuits. Claimants were instigated, as he believed, by one
or other of the Antonies; while Gaius Antonius, acting _prætor urbanus_
for Brutus, would often preside in the court. He was resolved, however,
to carry out Cæsar’s will, even if he had to sell his own paternal estate
and draw upon his mother’s resources. But it seems, after all, that the
property of Cæsar which he did manage to get, or his own wealth, was so
ample, that he was able to do this without crippling himself. Pinarius
and Pedius got their shares, but handed them over to him, perhaps as
being too heavily weighted with legacies to be of much value to them, or
thinking that his great future made it a good investment. At any rate
the legacies were paid, the games given, and when some months later he
proceeded to enroll two legions of veterans he was able to pay each man
a bounty amounting to something like £20 of our money.[85] At no time in
his career does he seem to have had serious money difficulties. No doubt
his resources were always large, but he must also have had the valuable
faculty of husbanding them in small matters, while always having enough
for large outlays.

[Sidenote: Difficulties about Octavian’s adoption.]

But it was not only in regard to money that Octavian found himself
thwarted by Antony and his brothers. A tribune, probably Lucius Antonius
himself, prevented the formal passing of the _lex curiata_ for his
adoption, with a view of weakening his claims upon the inheritance. When
he wished to be elected tribune in the place of Cinna, who had fallen
a victim to the mob in mistake for L. Cinna, a prætor who had spoken
against Cæsar, he was prevented by the partisans of Antony.[86] There
was indeed a legal obstacle in the fact that he was now a patrician,[87]
was under age, and had not held the quæstorship, though this last was
a breach of custom rather than of law. Lastly, Antony treated him with
studied disrespect, keeping him waiting in his ante-room; while Lucius
Antonius and the other tribunes forbade him to place Cæsar’s gilded chair
in the Circus at his games.[88]

[Sidenote: Octavian and the Optimates. After the meeting of the Senate in
June.]

It was clear that a breach between the two was imminent. The younger man
was not abashed by the years or high office of the other; and though some
formal reconciliation was brought about by common friends or by military
officers, Octavian seems to have allowed the Ciceronians to believe that
he intended to join them in opposing Antony. His attentions to them
became more marked after the meeting of the Senate of the 1st of June. To
this meeting the Constitutionalists had been looking forward as likely
to bring the uncertainty to an end. At it the question of the provinces
was to be settled; the two consuls, with the aid of a committee, were to
report on what were the genuine _acta_ of Cæsar; and some means were to
be found to enable Brutus and Cassius to carry on their duties as prætors
in Rome with safety.

[Sidenote: Antony and Cæsar’s _acta_ and veterans.]

Meanwhile Antony had been availing himself of the papers of Cæsar as
though the committee had already reported. He had also been securing
himself—as he thought—by visiting the colonies of Cæsar’s veterans in
Campania[89] and by gradually collecting a bodyguard. This had now
assumed sufficiently formidable proportions to overawe the Senate.[90] It
is true that he had experienced difficulties at Capua, where the existing
