coloni resented his attempt to plant others in the same territory; but,
on the whole, he seems to have improved his position by his tour in April
and May. Then again Lepidus had visited Sext. Pompeius in Spain, and was
reported to have induced him, on condition of recovering his father’s
property, to return to Rome and place his naval and military forces
(amounting to more than six legions) at the disposal of the consuls.[91]
This, thinks Cicero, would make Antony irresistible; and so no doubt
thought Octavian also.

[Sidenote: The position of Brutus and Cassius. The change of provinces.]

Nor did the meetings of the Senate in June effect anything to dissipate
these fears. What was done for Brutus and Cassius satisfied neither
party. They were offered the _cura annonæ_, superintendence of the
corn supply—Cassius in Sicily, Brutus in Asia—which would give them a
decent pretext for being absent from Rome for the rest of the year.
They, however, regarded this offer as an insult.[92] So also in regard
to the provinces: Brutus and Cassius were deprived of Macedonia and
Syria, which Cæsar had assigned to them respectively, and were offered
the unimportant governorships of Crete and Cyrene. But Antony in the
same meetings secured still greater military strength for himself by an
arrangement with Dolabella. The latter was appointed to Syria and the
command against the Parthians by a _lex_; and he then induced the Senate
to give Macedonia to himself, with the command of the legions stationed
there, one of which he had bargained with Dolabella to hand over to him.
These decrees having been passed,[93] he sent his brother Gaius over at
once to announce the fact to the legions in Macedonia and to give them
notice that they might at any time be summoned to Italy. For Antony
himself had no intention of going to Macedonia. His private resolve was
to hold Gallia Cisalpina with the largest force possible, as giving him
most hold on Italy. He had only accepted Macedonia in order to get these
legions into his hands. At the same time he carried a repeal of Cæsar’s
law confining the tenure of a province for a proprætor to one, and for a
proconsul to two, years.

[Sidenote: Antony gets himself nominated to Cisalpina Gaul.]

Though this increasing power of Antony was naturally calculated to alarm
Octavius, he was, on the other hand, opposed to Decimus Brutus—one of
the assassins—retaining Gallia Cisalpina. He therefore supported Antony
in carrying a law conferring that province on him at the end of his
consulship.[94] The Senators now saw that they had been tricked. They had
given Antony the Macedonian legions without conditions, and he would now
use them in another province given him by a _lex_—over which they had no
control. Suggestions were made to remove Gallia Cisalpina from the list
of provinces, and incorporate it (as was afterwards done by Augustus) in
Italy, thus doing away with any pretext for a proconsul residing there
with legions. But for the present the law stood which assigned it to
Antony for B.C. 43. It appears to have been passed by the beginning of
July, and he at once sent word to his brother to bring the legions over.
They were expected in July,[95] but did not actually arrive till nearly
three months later. Meanwhile a war of recriminations was maintained
between Antony the consul and Brutus and Cassius the prætors by letters
or edicts. Antony accused the prætors of collecting forces hostile to
the government, the prætors accused Antony of making it impossible for
them to come to Rome by denouncing them in speeches and edicts, in breach
of his promise. On the 1st of August L. Calpurnius Piso—father-in-law
of the late Cæsar—inveighed against Antony in the Senate, ending with
a hostile motion, of the exact nature of which we are not informed.
But he could get no one to speak or vote with him, so completely cowed
were the Senators by Antony’s military forces.[96] On the other hand,
Antony was uneasy at the growing popularity of Octavian, especially
among the veterans. He had himself made a bid for their favour by two
commissions for assigning land to them both in Italy and the provinces.
But the veterans were suspicious; they had expected some signal act of
vengeance for the murder of Cæsar; and at the same time Antony’s lavish
grants of public land to unworthy favourites impoverished the exchequer
and diminished the amount available for distribution. They lowered his
popularity with the veterans as much as they annoyed the Senators, who
yet did not venture to oppose him.

[Sidenote: Attempted assassination of Antony.]

The friction between the two men—varied by occasional
reconciliations—became more and more acute, until about the end of
September it was rumoured that Octavian had suborned men to assassinate
Antony. Of course Octavian disclaimed it, and upon Antony giving out that
certain men had been found in his house with daggers, he went openly
with an offer to serve along with his friends among his bodyguards. The
popular belief was that Antony had invented the whole story to discredit
him; but Cicero and others of his party both believed and approved, and
subsequent writers are divided in opinion. Nicolas of Damascus probably
gives Octavian’s own version, according to which Antony was unable to
produce the pretended assassins to a council of his friends, or to
induce them to advise active retaliation upon Octavian. Appian points
out that it was not to Octavian’s interest just then that Antony should
disappear, for it would have been a great encouragement to the party of
the Assassins, of whose real sentiments towards himself he was no doubt
aware.[97]

For with this party his alliance was a matter of great doubt. In June
Cicero had said of him:

[Sidenote: Octavian and the Optimates.]

    “In Octavian, as I have perceived, there is no little ability
    and spirit; and he seems likely to be as well disposed to our
    heroes as I could wish. But what confidence one can feel in a
    man of his age, name, inheritance, and upbringing may well give
    us pause. His stepfather, whom I saw at Antium, thinks none at
    all. However, we must foster him, and, if nothing else, keep
    him estranged from Antony. Marcellus will be doing admirable
    service if he gives him good advice. Octavian seems devoted to
    him, but has no great confidence in Pansa and Hirtius.”[98]

Philippus was not a man for whom Cicero had a great respect.[99] But
Marcellus, the husband of Octavia (Cos. B.C. 50), was a sound aristocrat
and a trustworthy man. Still Octavian had done nothing since to identify
himself with the conservative party, in spite of his differences with
Antony. With Cicero himself he kept up friendly communications; yet at
the final breach between Cicero and Antony in September, it does not seem
to have occurred to Cicero to put forward Octavian as Antony’s opponent;
nor does he mention him in the first two Philippics. It was Octavian’s
own independent action which first shewed that he was ready and able to
assume that position, and Cicero viewed this at first with anxiety and
almost dismay.

[Sidenote: Octavian enrolls veterans.]

Antony left Rome on the 9th of October to meet the Macedonian legions
at Brundisium. Octavian no longer hesitated. Sending agents to tamper
with the loyalty of the newly arrived legions, he himself went a round
of the veterans in Campania, offering them a bounty of 500 denarii
(about £20), if they would enlist again. In doing this he acted wholly
on his own initiative and without authority from Senate or people, and
without holding any office giving him military command.[100] In after
years Augustus regarded this as the first step in his public career,
the first service rendered to the State: “When nineteen years old I
raised an army on my own initiative and at my own expense, with which
I restored to liberty the republic which had been crushed under the
tyranny of a faction.” And not only did he reckon this his first public
service; the wording of this statement is a declaration that he thereby
adopted the policy and was continuing the work of his “father,” for he
uses the very phrase which Cæsar had used in justifying himself.[101]
This phrase illustrates another point also. Ostensibly the enrolment of
veterans was to protect himself against Antony. Perhaps he did not yet
see how it was to be done, but at the bottom of his heart was the purpose
of checkmating, if not destroying, the clique which had caused Cæsar’s
murder, though for the moment he was with them in opposition to Antony,
and was eager to have Cicero’s support and approval. Yet how doubtful and
uneasy the orator felt is shewn by two letters in which he tells what
Octavian was doing.

    “Puteoli, 2 November. On the evening of the 1st I got a letter
    from Octavian. He is entering upon a serious undertaking.
    He has won over to his views all the veterans at Casilinum
    and Calatia. And no wonder: he gives a bounty of 500 denarii
    apiece. Clearly his view is a war with Antony under his own
    leadership. So I perceive that before many days are over we
    shall be in arms. But whom are we to follow? Consider his name,
    consider his age! Again, he demands to begin with a secret
    interview with me at Capua of all places! It is really quite
    childish to suppose that it can be kept quiet. I have written
    to explain to him that it is neither necessary nor practicable.
    He sent a certain Cæcina of Volaterræ to me, an intimate friend
    of his own, who brought me news that Antony was on his way to
    the city with the _Alaudæ_, was imposing money contribution
    on the municipal towns, and was marching at the head of the
    legion with colours flying. He wanted my opinion, whether he
    should start for Rome with his legion of 3,000 veterans, or
    should hold Capua, and so intercept Antony’s advance, or should
    join the three Macedonian legions now sailing by the Mare
    Superum, which he hopes are devoted to himself. They refused
    to accept a bounty offered them by Antony, as my informant at
    least asserts. They even used grossly insulting language to
    him and moved off when he attempted to address them. In short,
    Octavian offers himself as our military leader, and thinks
    that our right policy is to stand by him. On my part I advised
    his making for Rome. For I think he will have, not only the
    city mob, but, if he can impress them with confidence, the
    loyalists also on his side. Oh, Brutus! Where are you! What an
    opportunity you are losing! I did not actually foresee this,
    but I thought that something of the sort would happen.”

    “Puteoli [3] November. Two letters on the same day from
    Octavian! His present view is that I should come to Rome at
    once, and that he wishes to act through the Senate. I told him
    that a meeting of the Senate was impossible before the 1st of
    January, and I believe it is so. But he adds also, ‘and by your
    advice.’ In short he insists, while I suspend judgment. I don’t
    trust his youth, I am in the dark as to his disposition, I am
    not able to do anything without your friend Pansa. I am afraid
    of Antony succeeding, and I don’t like moving far from the sea.
    At the same time I fear some great _coup_ being struck without
    my being there. Varro for his part dislikes the youth’s plan.
    I don’t agree with him. He has forces on which he can depend.
    He can count on Decimus Brutus, and is making no secret of his
    intentions. He is organising his men in companies at Capua, he
    is paying them their bounty money. War seems to be ever coming
    nearer and nearer.”[102]

[Sidenote: Antony’s breach with the Senate, November-December, B.C. 44.]

In spite of these half-hearted and doubtful expressions of Cicero, the
Senate at his own suggestion was presently glad to approve Octavian’s
action, and to accept his aid. For events now followed quickly.
When Antony met the legions at Brundisium, sent over by his brother
Gaius,[103] he seems at first to have found them ready to obey him. But
difficulties were presently promoted by the agents of Octavian, who
offered the men liberal bounties, or scattered _libelli_ among them
denouncing Antony’s tyranny and neglect of Cæsar’s memory, and urging
Octavian’s claim on their allegiance. Signs of mutiny soon shewed
themselves, and after a stormy meeting at which some officers and men
used insubordinate language, Antony arrested and put to death several of
the officers as ringleaders, and about 300 men.[104] These severities,
followed by more liberal offers and some conciliatory language, seemed
for the time to put an end to the mutiny. Selecting therefore a
“prætorian cohort” from the legions, Antony started for Rome, ordering
the rest to march in detachments up the coast road to Ariminum, where the
_via Æmilia_ through the valley of the Po begins. In Cicero’s letters
of the 8th, 11th, and 12th of November are recorded the various rumours
of his approach, and the anxieties as to what he intended to do at
Rome.[105] He arrived about the 20th in full military array, and entered
the city with a strong bodyguard, the rest of his men being encamped
outside the walls. He did not stay long however. Having summoned the
Senate for the 25th, in an edict, in which he denounced the character and
aims of Octavian,[106] he went to Tibur, where he had ordered his new
levies to muster. Here he delivered a speech, which Cicero afterwards
described as “pestilent.”[107] On the 25th, however, he did not appear
in the Senate. A second edict postponed the meeting to the 29th. Cicero
insinuates that his non-appearance on the 25th was caused by some extra
debauch. But, in fact, the reason may have been the news about the _legio
Martia_, which, instead of going to Ariminum, had turned off from the
coast road and reached Alba Fucensis. It might be of course that the
legion was on its way to join Antony at Tibur, to which there was a good
road from Alba Fucensis (_via Valeria_). Antony therefore went to Alba,
but found the gates closed, and was greeted by a shower of arrows from
the walls. It was clear that this legion at least did not mean to serve
him. He came to Rome for the meeting of the Senate on the 29th, but was
informed just before it that the Quarta had followed the example of the
Martia, and was at Alba Fucensis. He understood that these legions meant
to join Octavian, and he no longer thought it possible to get Octavian
declared a _hostis_, though one of his partisans was ready to propose it.
Having therefore transacted some formal business—chiefly the allotment
of provinces, in which his brother Gaius obtained Macedonia, and a
supplicatio in honour of Lepidus, he hurriedly returned to Tibur. His
friends and supporters visited him in great numbers; but within a few
days he was on his march to Ariminum to join what remained of the five
Macedonian legions.[108]

[Sidenote: Cicero’s doubts as to Octavian’s intentions.]

Antony’s object was to attack Decimus Brutus, whose forces were
concentrated at Mutina. But at any rate, he was gone from Rome, and
Octavian had won the first trick in the game. Cicero attributes Antony’s
lowered tone in the Senate, and his hurried departure, to Octavian’s
promptness and success in raising the veterans, and inducing the Martia
and Quarta to desert him. At first, however, he had not felt easy as to
the young man’s intentions. Writing from Puteoli on the 5th of November
he tells Atticus that he gets a letter from Octavian every day, begging
him to come to Capua and once more to save the republic, or, if not, at
least to go to Rome. Cicero is “shamed to refuse and yet afraid to take”;
but owns that Octavian is acting with vigour, and will probably enter
Rome in great force. But he doubts whether the young man understands
the situation, or the terrorism established by Antony in the Senate. He
had better wait, he thinks, till the new consulate begins on January
1st.[109] About the 12th of November, he tells Atticus that if Octavian
wins now, the fear is that he will confirm Cæsar’s _acta_ more completely
than ever, which will be against the interests of Brutus, while, if he is
beaten, Antony will become more despotic still.[110] Early in December
(or the end of November), he mentions with alarm the possibility of
Octavian being elected for a chance vacancy in the Tribunate[111]; and
assents to a remark made by Atticus, that though Octavian had given
Antony a notable check, “they must wait to see the end.” Again he says to
Oppius, “I cannot be warmly on his side without having some security that
he will cordially embrace the friendship of Brutus and Cassius and the
other tyrannicides.”[112]

[Sidenote: Octavian begins his march.]

On the 9th of December, however, when he came to Rome after Antony’s
departure, Cicero made up his mind that for the present all distrust was
to be dismissed or at least concealed. Octavian had mustered his forces
at Alba Fucensis, and after some communications with the Senate—which
warmly welcomed his offer of aid—had started with his legions on the
track of Antony; who before the end of the year began the investment of
Mutina, upon the refusal of Decimus Brutus to quit the province.

[Sidenote: Octavian is recognised by the Senate, and obtains imperium,
Jan. B.C. 43.]

Accordingly, on the 20th of December, Cicero himself proposed a
resolution in the Senate authorising the Consuls-designate to provide for
the safe meeting of the Senate on the 1st of January; approving of an
edict of Decimus Brutus, just arrived, in which he forbade any one with
imperium entering his province to succeed him; directing all provincial
governors to retain their provinces till successors were named by the
Senate; and, lastly, approving the action of “Gaius Cæsar” in enrolling
the veterans, and of the Martia and Quarta in having joined him. These
resolutions were to be formally put to the Senate on the 1st of January
by the new consuls.[113] Accordingly on that and the following days,
after somewhat stormy debates, these decrees were passed, as well as one
which acknowledged the services of Octavian, and gave him the rank of
proprætor with imperium. It was also enacted that in regard to elections
to office he should be considered to have held the quæstorship. He
thus became a member of the Senate, with a right of speaking among the
_prætorii_, and consequently with a plausible claim to stand for the
consulship, in spite of his youth. A second decree—after the battles at
Mutina—gave him _consularia ornamenta_.[114]

