Octavian was now fully launched on his public career. He had shown both
Antony and the Senate that he was no negligible quantity. Though the
Senate neither liked nor trusted him, he had played his cards with such
skill that it was forced to treat him as its champion; while Antony had
contrived to put himself in such clear opposition to the constitutional
claims of the Senate, that Octavian could attack him without thereby
committing himself to the support of the Assassins, and had made himself
so strong that (if he proved successful against Antony) he would
hereafter be able to dictate his own terms. Cicero saw this clearly
enough, but he hoped that the defeat of Antony would secure to the side
of the Senate the governors of Gaul and Spain with their legions,[115]
and that thus supported they would be able to discard their youthful
champion. “He was,” he said later on, “to be complimented, distinguished,
and—extinguished.”[116] We shall now see how the hopes of the sanguine
orator were once more blasted, and how all these intrigues were baffled
by the wary policy and cool persistence of “the boy.”




CHAPTER IV

THE CONSULSHIP AND TRIUMVIRATE

    _Gravesque_
    _principum amicitias._


[Sidenote: Octavian’s position at the beginning of B.C. 43.]

The campaign of Mutina, in which Octavian had now embarked, was ended by
two battles—one at Forum Gallorum on the 15th, and another at Antony’s
camp on the 21st of April. After the latter date there were military
movements of some interest and importance, but no actual conflict. Before
these battles Octavian’s position had been difficult and delicate; and
though it was much improved after them, it was not in the way expected
by the Senate. The change was due to his own prudence and energy. Since
his start from Alba to follow Antony the aspect of affairs at Rome had
been much modified, and he had had good reason to doubt the favour of
the party over whom Cicero was now exercising a predominant influence.
Cicero appears indeed to have kept up a constant correspondence with
Octavian, in which he did his best by flattery and argument to retain
his aid and lull his suspicions. But there were facts which it must
have been difficult for him to explain to Octavian’s satisfaction. It
is true that besides the honours voted to him in the Senate in the
first week of B.C. 43, he had been joined with the other magistrate
in the _Senatus-consultum ultimum_, empowering them to “see that
the state took no harm.”[117] But though the decrees also gave him a
constitutional right to command soldiers,[118] yet the despatch of the
two consuls to the seat of war deprived him of the chief command; while
the more moderate party had carried over Cicero’s head a resolution to
send three commissioners to negotiate with Antony. Cicero asserts that
they were only authorised to convey to Antony the Senate’s order that
he was to quit the Gallic province. That was not, however, the view of
the commissioners themselves. One of them—Serv. Sulpicius Rufus—died
on the journey; but the other two—L. Calpurnius Piso and L. Marcius
Philippus—brought back some proposals from Antony in February, which, had
they been accepted, might perhaps have secured the safety of Brutus and
Cassius, but would certainly have left Octavian out in the cold, without
any pretext for keeping up his military force.

[Sidenote: Antony’s proposals.]

Antony proposed to give up the Cisalpine province, on condition of
receiving Transalpine Gaul—exclusive of Narbonensis—with the six legions
already under him, supplemented by those at present commanded by Dec.
Brutus, for five years, or for such time as Brutus and Cassius should
be consuls or proconsuls. Secondly, on condition that the _acta_ of his
consulship—including the use of the money from the temple of Ops and
his grants of lands—should be left intact; and that those serving with
him should have complete indemnity.[119] The envoys were against the
extreme measure of declaring a state of war (rather than a _tumultus_)
and proclaiming Antony a _hostis_, and the majority of the Senate
agreed with them and voted for further negotiations. It was a strange
position. Octavian had been authorised by the Senate to drive Antony
from Cisalpine Gaul. One of the consuls—Aulus Hirtius—had left Rome with
two legions, and had, in fact, come into contact with the enemy in a
cavalry skirmish at Claterna; the other consul, Pansa, was also preparing
to follow. Yet the Senate was negotiating with Antony as though he were
not a _hostis_, but a citizen with a grievance. The time was soon to come
when Octavian, too, would find it convenient to make terms with Antony;
but nothing could have been more against his interests than the present
action of the Senate. It would seem to him a cynical disregard of their
mutual obligations. Nor was this the worst. Antony’s offer as to Brutus
and Cassius was only an offer to recognise an accomplished fact. These
two leaders in the assassination had been already nominated by the Senate
to Macedonia and Syria. Cicero was in constant correspondence with them,
addressing them as the chief hope of the constitution, and suggesting
that their armies might be used to maintain the hold of the party on
Italy. Trebonius, moreover, had been sent to Asia with the express
understanding that he was to fortify that province and collect money to
support Brutus and Cassius. When news came that Trebonius had been put to
death by Dolabella, the latter was declared a _hostis_ by the Senate, and
his punishment entrusted to Cassius.

[Sidenote: Antony’s letter to Octavian.]

These facts must have gradually made it quite clear to Octavian that
the complete triumph of the Ciceronian party would be no less damaging
to him than that of Antony. But though skilful use was made of them by
Antony himself in a letter addressed to Hirtius and Octavian,[120] the
young Cæsar was not to be induced to take any premature step. The Senate
might be dealt with hereafter: for the present the first necessity was to
prevent Antony from becoming strong enough to dictate terms to himself as
well as to the Senate. He therefore quietly continued to take his part in
the campaign.

[Sidenote: The military situation in the spring of B.C. 43.]

The Senatorial armies commanded the district round Mutina, except
Bononia, Regium Lepidi, and Parma. Of these towns, the first was
twenty-three miles east of Mutina along the Æmilian road; the other two
about the same distance west of it. They were in the hands of Antony,
affording him bases of operation on either side of Mutina. In the middle
of February Cicero was daily expecting to hear of Dec. Brutus ending
the war by a sally from Mutina. At that time Antony’s headquarters
were at Bononia, only a part of his troops actually investing Mutina.
Hirtius was at Claterna, eleven miles east of Bononia; Octavian at Forum
Cornelii (Imola), nine miles farther east. Bad weather had prevented
serious operations, but some time in March Antony evacuated Bononia to
push on the siege of Mutina with his full force. Hirtius and Octavian at
once occupied Bononia, and gradually pushed out fortified posts towards
Mutina;[121] for Dec. Brutus was hard pressed for food, and they feared
that he would have to surrender. But not being on an equality with
Antony, especially in cavalry, they were anxious to wait for the fresh
legions from Rome under Pansa. Some minor skirmishes took place from time
to time,[122] but as the days dragged on and Mutina was not relieved, the
anxiety at Rome grew greater and greater. “I am restlessly waiting for
news,” writes Cicero on the 11th of April; “the decisive hour is upon us;
for our whole hope depends on relieving Dec. Brutus.”[123] On the 15th
and 16th there was a panic in the city caused by the prætor Ventidius
Bassus. He had enrolled two legions of veterans, and was believed to be
about to enter Rome. He, however, marched off to Potentia to watch the
result of the struggle in Gallia Cisalpina; and a few days later came the
news of the victory of Forum Gallorum, which changed this unreasonable
panic into an exultation almost as unreasonable.[124]

[Sidenote: Battle of Forum Gallorum, April 15th, B.C. 43.]

Pansa was expected to reach the seat of war about the 16th of April.
A detachment, consisting of the Martia and two prætorian cohorts, was
sent out to conduct him and his four new legions into camp. In order to
intercept this force Antony concealed two legions in Forum Gallorum,
only allowing his cavalry and light armed to be seen. On the 14th Pansa
encamped near Bononia, and next morning started to join Hirtius in his
camp near Mutina, along with the troops sent out to meet him. The main
force marched over the open country; the two prætorian cohorts kept to
the _via Æmilia_. Near Forum Gallorum there was some marshy and difficult
ground. The Martia got through this first, and suddenly sighted Antony’s
cavalry. The men could not be held back: enraged at the recollection of
their comrades executed at Brundisium, they broke into a charge. Pansa,
unable to stop them, tried to bring up two new legions to their support.
But Antony was too quick for him. He suddenly led out his legions from
the village, and Pansa, in danger of being surrounded, had to retire upon
his camp of the previous night, having himself received two wounds,
while the prætorian cohorts on the Æmilian road were cut to pieces.
Antony seemed to have won the day. But he attempted too much. He pushed
on towards Bononia, hoping to storm the camp, but was beaten off and
forced to retire to his own quarters near Mutina. He was, however, many
hours’ march from them. His men were tired, and when they reached Forum
Gallorum again they were met by Hirtius, who, having heard of Pansa’s
disaster, had come out with twenty veteran cohorts. Antony’s wearied men
were utterly routed almost on the ground of their morning’s victory, and
he had to escape with his cavalry to his camp near Mutina, which he did
not reach till long after sunset. Hirtius had no cavalry to pursue him,
and accordingly went on to visit the wounded Pansa.

Though the prætorian cohorts which had suffered so severely on the road
were Octavian’s, he was not leading them, nor does he seem to have been
engaged in either of the battles. But it appears that some of Antony’s
men had threatened the camp in charge of which he had been left, and that
his success in repelling this attack was sufficiently marked for his
soldiers to greet him with the title of Imperator as well as Hirtius and
Pansa.[125]

[Sidenote: Antony’s second defeat at Mutina, 21 April.]

The news of this victory reached Rome on the 20th, and the extravagant
exultation of the Ciceronians may be gathered from the Fourteenth
Philippic. But Antony was still investing Mutina, and though he had lost
heavily, so also had his opponents, especially the Martia and Octavian’s
prætorian cohorts. Pansa, disabled by his wounds, had been carried to
Bononia, and for some days nothing of importance was attempted. But on
the 21st Hirtius and Octavian moved to the west of Mutina, where the
lines of investment were less complete, with the hope of relieving the
town on that side. Antony sent out his cavalry to intercept them, and,
after some skirmishing, two legions to support it. Octavian attacked
and drove them back to their camp, into which Hirtius forced his way,
but was killed within the vallum. Octavian got possession of the body,
but had presently to evacuate the camp. Still Antony’s losses in these
two battles had been so severe that he feared being himself invested by
Octavian, who would in that case, he felt sure, be joined by Lepidus and
Plancus. Whatever might then be the fate of Decimus Brutus, he at any
rate would be paralysed. He resolved to make a dash for the Transalpine
province, hoping there to be joined not only by Pollio, Lepidus, and
Plancus, but by Ventidius also. He accordingly raised the siege, and with
a strong body of cavalry marched along the _via Æmilia_. At Dertona he
left the road, and made the difficult pass of Aquæ Statiellæ, leading
to the coast at Vada Sabatia. There he was joined by Ventidius, and
proceeded along the Riviera into the province. Decimus Brutus did not
start in pursuit till the third day, partly owing to the exhausted state
of his men after their long investment, partly because he wished to
induce Octavian to join him.

[Sidenote: The exultant Ciceronians slight Octavian.]

The news of Antony’s retirement reached Rome on the 26th. The exultant
Ciceronians regarded the war as at an end, and next day, under Cicero’s
influence, Antony and his adherents were declared _hostes_ in the
Senate.[126] He was believed to be utterly ruined, and the Senate was
regarded as once more supreme. Decimus Brutus would of course cut to
pieces the poor remains of Antony’s troops; Lepidus and Plancus would
hold their provinces in obedience to the Senate. Octavian was no longer
necessary, and was immediately made to feel it. Not only were scandalous
rumours spread abroad, charging him with causing the death of Hirtius,
and suborning his physician to poison the wounds of Pansa,[127] but
in the vote of thanks to the army no mention was made of him. The vote
also was so framed as to introduce divisions in the army itself by
naming certain cohorts for honour and passing over others; while the
legates conveying these thanks and honours were instructed to communicate
directly with the men, not through Octavian as their commander. The
legions of Pansa were transferred to Decimus Brutus, even the Martia and
Quarta, formerly commended for joining Octavian. At the same time, all
those most likely to be hostile to him were promoted. Sext. Pompeius was
declared head of the naval forces of the republic; Brutus and Cassius
were confirmed in their provinces and given special powers in all other
provinces east of the Adriatic; a commission of ten was appointed to
revise the _acta_ of Antony’s consulship, in which Octavian had no
place.[128] Lastly, his claim to a triumph and to be a candidate for one
of the vacant consulships was rejected, though as a kind of sop he was
granted _consularia ornamenta_,[129] and Cicero appears to have proposed
his having an ovation.[130] But it was about the same time that Cicero’s
unlucky epigram as to “distinguishing and extinguishing” him was reported
to Octavian.[131] If Cicero, who was in constant correspondence with
him, and was even discussing the possibilities of their holding the
consulship as colleagues,[132] could thus speak, what was he to think of
the rest? No doubt all these circumstances contributed to fix Octavian’s
resolve. He at once declined to co-operate with Decimus Brutus, or to
surrender his legions to him. Although those under Hirtius and Pansa
had been assigned bodily by the Senate to Brutus, the Martia and Quarta
refused to obey the order, and declared their loyalty to Octavian. Their
example was followed by the other veterans, who refused to serve under
an assassin of their old imperator. Thus fortified, Octavian adopted
a line of conduct which partly alarmed and partly puzzled the other
commanders of troops. He established secret communications with Antony,
releasing prisoners taken from his army, and allowing certain officers
to rejoin him; while he himself, remaining inactive for some months, was
privately preparing to enforce his claim on the consulship. The departure
of Decimus Brutus left him in undisturbed command of the greater part of
Cisalpine Gaul, and there were no military forces between him and Rome,
now that Ventidius had accomplished his rapid march from Potentia to the
western coast at Vada.

[Sidenote: Revulsion of feeling at Rome.]

The gradual disillusionment of the Ciceronians as to the victory over
Antony; the perplexity caused by the inactivity of Octavian; the delays
and helplessness of Decimus Brutus—all these are faithfully reflected
in the Cicero correspondence of this period. At first everything is
_couleur-de-rose_. On the 21st of April, on the receipt of the news of
the battle of Forum Gallorum, he writes:—

    “In the youthful Cæsar there is a wonderful natural strain of
    virtue. Pray heaven we may govern him in the flush of honours
    and popularity as easily as we have held him up to this time!
    This is certainly a more difficult thing, but nevertheless I
    have no mistrust. For the young man has been convinced, and
    chiefly by my arguments, that our safety is his work, and that,
    at any rate, if he had not diverted Antony from the city, all
    would have been lost.”[133]

On the 27th (after hearing of the fight at the camp) he thinks Octavian
is with Decimus Brutus in pursuit of Antony or, as he says, “of the
remnant of the enemy.”[134]

But presently he is informed that Octavian is not thus acting, or serving
the interests of the Senate. Decimus Brutus writes from Dertona on the
5th of May:—

    “If Cæsar had hearkened to me and crossed the Apennines, I
    should have reduced Antony to such straits that he would have
    been ruined by failure of provisions rather than the sword. But
    neither can any one control Cæsar, nor can Cæsar control his
    own army—both most disastrous facts.”[135]

Decimus Brutus was inaccurately informed as to the relations between
Octavian and his troops,[136] but was quite right in concluding that
he had no help to expect from him. He wrote again on the 12th of May,
attributing his delay in beginning the pursuit to the fact that “he could
not put any confidence in Cæsar without visiting and conversing with
him.”[137] He had, however, gained nothing by the interview, and had
been specially dismayed to find that the Martia and Quarta refused to
join him.[138] On the 24th of May he writes again, warning Cicero that
Octavian has heard of his epigram; that the veterans are indignant at
the proceedings in Rome; and that Octavian had secured all the troops
lately commanded by Pansa.[139] Later in the same month he appears to
have suggested the recall of M. Brutus, and that meanwhile the defence of
Italy should be intrusted to Octavian.[140]

This last suggestion shows how far he had failed to penetrate the policy
