of Octavian. The mistake was shared by L. Munatius Plancus, governor
of Celtic Gaul, who was moving down towards the province expecting to
be joined by Octavian in opposing Antony, or, at any rate, supposing
that Octavian’s army was at the disposal of the Senate. “Let Cæsar,”
he says, on the 6th of June, “come with the best troops he has, or, if
anything prevents him from coming in person, let his army be sent.”[141]
Some weeks later he too had learnt that Cæsar’s real purpose had been
misunderstood. He writes on the 28th of July:—

    “I have never ceased importuning him by letter, and he has
    uniformly replied that he is coming without delay, while all
    the time I perceive that he has given up that idea, and has
    taken up some other scheme. Nevertheless, I have sent our
    friend Furnius to him with a message and a letter, in case he
    may be able to do some good.”[142]

While the generals in Gaul were thus being gradually brought to see that
Octavian had an independent policy of his own, the hopes of support
entertained by Cicero at home were one by one disappearing. By the middle
of May he knew that Antony’s retreat was not the disorganised flight
supposed, nor the end of the war.

    “The news which reached Rome,” he says, about the 15th of May,
    “and what everybody believed, was that Antony had fled with
    a small body of men, who were without arms, panic stricken,
    and utterly demoralised. But if he is in such a position (as
    Græceius tells us) that he cannot be offered battle without
    risk, he appears to me not to have fled from Mutina, but merely
    to have changed the seat of war. Accordingly there is a general
    revulsion of feeling.”[143]

In these circumstances Cicero could do nothing but try to keep Decimus
Brutus, Lepidus, and Plancus loyal to the Senate, and urge them to act
with vigour.

    “Be your own Senate,” he writes to Plancus about the 27th of
    May, “and follow wherever the interests of the public service
    shall lead you. Let it be your object that we hear of some
    brilliant operation by you before we thought that it was going
    to happen. I pledge you my word that whatever you achieve the
    Senate will accept as having been done not only with loyal
    intention, but with wisdom also.”[144]

But on the 29th of May Lepidus joined Antony.[145] On the 3rd of June
Decimus Brutus writes for the last time in despairing tones to Cicero
from near Grenoble,[146] and though a subsequent junction with Plancus
kept him from destruction for a few weeks longer, he was never able to
do anything of any account again. The only hope remaining to Cicero was
to induce M. Brutus or C. Cassius, or both, to come to Italy with their
armies. He had not, indeed, quite given up hope of Octavian’s loyalty,
but his old doubts were recurring, and though he still used flattering
words to him, he must have been conscious that Octavian had gauged their
value. Late in June, writing to urge M. Brutus to come to Italy, he says:
“The protecting force of the young Cæsar I regard as trustworthy; but so
many are trying to sap his loyalty that at times I am mortally afraid of
his giving in.”[147]

[Sidenote: Octavian, after some vain negotiations, at length moves on
Rome. Aug., B.C. 43.]

It does not seem true that Octavian yielded to the influence of others in
the steps which he now took. As at other times in his life he may have
listened to advice, but the final decision was always his own, adopted
from passing sentiment or passion, but with the cool determination of
settled policy. He had decided that to be able to treat with Antony on
equal terms he must obtain one of the vacant consulships. This would
make him legally head of the State, and add to his military strength
the prestige and authority of that position. If possible he would be
elected without any show of force, and therefore began negotiations
with the Senate soon after the battles of Mutina through Cicero. But
the Senate suspected Cicero of wishing for the consulship himself, and
would not listen to the suggestion. The constitutional difficulty
about the election gave the Senate a decent excuse for postponement.
Both consuls were dead, and the prætor was unable to “create” a higher
imperium than his own. There was no one to name a dictator, and as
magistrates with imperium still existed the _auspicia_ had not reverted
to the _patres_, therefore they could not name _interreges_. On the 1st
of January, when the curule offices would all be vacant, the _auspicia_
would revert to the Senate. Accordingly, after some discussion, Cicero
tells a correspondent at the end of June, it had been held to be best,
“in the interests of the constitution, to put off the elections till
January.”[148] But Octavian had no intention of being thwarted by this
technical difficulty. He had no wish for the present to farther weaken
Antony, and bring the whole weight of the Ciceronians upon himself, but
he was resolved that the consulship was necessary in order to be on
an equal footing with him.[149] He therefore allowed a deputation of
four hundred of his soldiers to go to Rome to demand the payment of the
bounties voted to them, with the understanding that they were also to
ask for the consulship for Octavian. There would be some show of reason
in combining these two demands, for they needed his protection against
the decemvirs, who were likely to interfere in the allotment of lands
made both by Iulius and Antony. But the deputation, though admitted to
the curia, received an unfavourable answer. We are told that the Senate
insisted on their appearing unarmed, but that one of them left the Senate
house and returned with a sword and the remark, “If you do not give Cæsar
the consulship this will do so.” Whereupon Cicero exclaimed, “If that is
your way of pressing his suit, he will get it.” The same story is told
of Iulius, and one is always suspicious of such dramatic scenes.[150] At
any rate, Octavian regarded the attitude of the Senate as hostile, and
determined to march on Rome with his eight legions,[151] a corresponding
force of cavalry, and some auxiliary troops.

[Sidenote: Octavian enters Rome and obtains the consulship. August, B.C.
43.]

He moved in two columns, the first consisting of his swiftest and most
active men, led by himself; for among other causes of anxiety was a
fear that his mother and sister might meet with ill-treatment in Rome.
The Senate had no troops to oppose to this formidable army, and in its
terror sent legates with the money promised to the men, but lately
refused to the deputation. Octavian however refused them entrance into
the camp, and pushed on without stopping. The panic in the city grew
daily more acute, and Cicero, who had pledged his credit for Octavian’s
loyalty,[152] found himself an object of suspicion and retired from Rome.
Then every concession was made in the Senate: the bounty promised to some
of the troops was doubled, and extended to all the troops alike, though
the exchequer was exhausted by the payment of only two legions.[153]
Octavian was to have the distribution of lands and rewards instead of the
decemvirs, and was allowed to be a candidate for the consulship in his
absence. Messengers were sent to announce these concessions to him; but
he had scarcely heard them when he was informed of a change of sentiment
in Rome. The legions, summoned by the Senate from Africa, had arrived;
Cicero had reappeared; the decrees were rescinded; and measures were
being taken to defend the city. The two legions from Africa were to be
supported by a levy _en masse_ and by a legion enrolled by Pansa but not
taken with him. The city prætor M. Cornutus was to be commander-in-chief.
At the same time boats and other means of transport were being prepared
in the Tiber for the escape of the chief citizens, their families and
property, in case of defeat; while a vigorous search was being made for
Octavian’s mother and sister as hostages. Octavian felt that no time
was to be lost. Sending forward messengers to assure the people that
they would not be harmed,[154] he continued his advance on Rome. A day’s
march from the city he was met by a large number of real or pretended
sympathisers; and felt it safe to leave his troops and enter Rome with
a strong bodyguard. Enthusiastic crowds greeted his entrance, and as he
approached the temple of Vesta he had the happiness of seeing his mother
and sister, who had taken sanctuary with the Vestals, and now came out to
embrace him. The three legions in Rome, in spite of some opposition from
their officers, declared for him; and the prætor Cornutus killed himself
in despair. It was all over, and Octavian was master of the situation.
For a moment indeed there seemed a gleam of hope. A rumour reached the
city that the Martia and Quarta had refused to follow Octavian to Rome.
Cicero hastily gathered some partisans into the Senate house in the
evening to discuss the possibility of further resistance. But while they
were in conference they learnt that the rumour was false. There was
nothing for it but to disperse, and Cicero was fain to seek out Octavian
and offer a tardy congratulation—received with ironical courtesy.

[Sidenote: The consulship and other honours.]

The constitutional difficulty as to the election was at once surmounted
by the investment of two men with proconsular powers to hold it. The rest
was a mere form, and on the 19th of August Octavian, with his cousin
Q. Pedius, entered upon their consulship. The now obsequious Senate
proceeded to heap honours upon him. He was to have money to pay the
promised bounties; to enjoy an imperium, when with an army, superior to
the consuls; to do whatever he thought necessary for the protection of
the city; and to take over the army lately assigned to Decimus Brutus.
The _lex curiata_ for his adoption under Cæsar’s will was at once
passed, and he was now by right as well as by courtesy a Cæsar. His
colleague, Q. Pedius, at the same time carried a law for the trial of all
concerned in the murder of Iulius, and the _quæstio_ seems at once to
have been instituted. All were condemned in their absence and lost their
citizenship and the protection of the laws.[155] Brutus and Cassius, with
the rest of the assassins, were thus put at a great disadvantage. It was
an act of war on their part, as condemned men, to hold their provinces or
command troops. That the Senate, in which the majority were doubtless in
favour of Brutus and Cassius, should have practically sanctioned these
measures,[156] shews how completely it was cowed. Octavian’s position
was, in fact, a very strong one. It was not possible for M. Brutus to
transport a sufficient force from Macedonia to crush him, much less for
Cassius from Syria. The two combined would no doubt hope some day to be
able to attack him; but meanwhile he had time to fortify himself by new
coalitions.

[Sidenote: Octavian goes to meet Antony.]

Cæsar—as we should now call him—only stayed in Rome to see these measures
secured. He then left the city under the care of Pedius, and marched
once more into Cisalpine Gaul. His nominal object was to destroy Decimus
Brutus—now a condemned man—but his real purpose was to come to an
understanding with Antony and Lepidus. Letters had already passed between
them, and some plan of action had been agreed upon. Antony was to crush
Decimus Brutus and Plancus, while the Senate was persuaded by Pedius to
rescind the decrees declaring Antony and Lepidus _hostes_. This news
was sent to Cæsar while on his leisurely march, and passed on by him to
Antony; who thereupon proceeded to fulfil his part of the bargain. He was
by this time, or shortly afterwards, reinforced by Asinius Pollio[157]
with two legions from Spain, who at once succeeded in securing the
cohesion of Plancus. The greater part of the troops under Decimus Brutus
also insisted on following Plancus; and Brutus was obliged to fly with a
small force.

[Sidenote: Death of Decimus Brutus.]

[Sidenote: The triumvirate arranged, Nov., B.C. 43.]

This settled the fate of Decimus Brutus, and left Northern Italy open to
Antony, unless Cæsar still chose to oppose him. After various fruitless
attempts to escape, Brutus was put to death by a Sequanian Gaul, under
orders from Antony,[158] who then with Pollio and Lepidus[159] marched
into Cispadane Gaul with a large part of their forces, the rest being
left to guard the province. The invading army marched along the Æmilian
road as though to attack Cæsar. But the real intention on both sides
was to come to terms. On an islet in a tributary of the Po, between
Mutina and Bononia, the three leaders, Antony, Lepidus, and Cæsar met
for conference, though not till elaborate precautions had been taken
against treachery. For two days they sat from morning till night in
earnest debate, in full view of their respective armies. On the third the
soldiers of both sides were summoned to a _contio_, and informed of the
articles which had been agreed upon, though the last and most terrible
of them—the proscription—was not communicated. The terms announced were:
(1) Cæsar agreed to abdicate the consulship, which was to be held for
the remainder of the year by Ventidius Bassus; (2) Lepidus and Plancus
were to be consuls for B.C. 42; (3) Lepidus, Cæsar, and Antony were to be
appointed by a _lex_ for the remainder of the year, and for five years
from the next 1st of January, _triumviri reipublicæ constituendæ_—a board
of three for settling the constitution.

[Sidenote: Powers of the Triumvirate.]

The Triumvirate was practically a dictatorship in commission. The word
was avoided owing to its prohibition in Antony’s law. But the triumvirs
were to exercise all the powers of a dictator; their _acta_ were to be
authoritative; they were to be independent of the Senate; superior to
all magistrates; to have the right of proposing laws to the _Comitia_;
to regulate the appointment of magistrates and provincial governors. The
colleagueship was an apparent concession to the fundamental principle of
the constitution; but from the first it was practically a duumvirate
rather than a triumvirate, Lepidus being treated almost at once as
inferior. The Empire east of the Adriatic was for the moment separated
from this home government, being held by Brutus and Cassius; but the
western part was to be divided among the three—Cæsar taking Africa,
Sardinia, and Sicily; Antony, Cisalpine Gaul and Transalpina, with the
exception of Narbonensis; Lepidus, Gallia Narbonensis and Upper Spain. In
these districts each would be supreme and govern personally or by their
legates. But the greater part of Cæsar’s share was still in the hands
of Sextus Pompeius, and would have to be won back. It was accordingly
arranged that in the following year Lepidus, as consul, should be
responsible for the order of Italy, while Cæsar undertook to put down
Sextus, and Antony to confront M. Brutus and Cassius.

The soldiers of both armies, having no desire to fight each other,
received the announcement with enthusiasm. Their devotion to Iulius
Cæsar’s memory was warmed by the belief that the anti-Cæsarean clique at
Rome meant to deprive them of the money and lands assigned to them. The
Triumvirs, on the other hand, promised them allotments in the choicest
parts of Italy—Capua, Rhegium, Venusia, Vibo, Beneventum, Ariminum,
Nuceria. There was land at most of these places which from one cause or
another had become _ager publicus_; and when that failed there would
always be owners, whose part in the war just over, and that about to
take place, would give opportunity for confiscation. This combination of
military chiefs therefore suited the views and wishes of the soldiers,
and some of them urged that the bond should be drawn still closer by
Cæsar’s marriage with Antony’s stepdaughter Clodia.[160] Cæsar assented
to the betrothal, but as Clodia was still quite young, he prudently
deferred the marriage. He doubtless foresaw possible inconveniences in
being too closely allied with Antony.

[Sidenote: The Proscription.]

The next step was for the three to enter Rome and obtain a legal
confirmation of their appointment. But they did not wait till their
arrival in the city to begin the vengeance. They had agreed to follow the
precedent of Sulla by publishing lists of men declared to be out of the
pale of the law. The larger list was reserved for further consideration;
but a preliminary list of seventeen names was drawn up at once, and
soldiers were sent with orders to put the men to death wherever found.
Among these were Cicero, his brother, and nephew. Plutarch tells us that
Cicero’s name was put upon the list as a compromise. Octavian bargained
for Lucius Cæsar, Antony’s uncle, and in return conceded to Antony the
inclusion of Cicero, while Lepidus consented to his brother, L. Paulus,
being entered.[161] Four of the seventeen were found at once and put to
death. Cicero escaped till the arrival of the triumvirs in Rome, but was
killed near Formiæ on the 7th of December, his brother and nephew having
already been put to death in Rome. Cæsar was the first to arrive in the
city, and was quickly followed by Antony and Lepidus, each with a strong
prætorian guard. Their appointment was duly confirmed in the _Comitia_
on the proposal of the tribune Titus Titius, and on the 27th of November
they entered upon their office.[162]

Naturally the sudden execution of three of the seventeen who were
found in Rome had created great alarm in the city, where no one knew
whose turn was to come next. The panic was somewhat lessened by Pedius
publishing the list of the seventeen, with the assurance that no more
executions were intended. He appears to have honestly believed this, but
the agitation of the night of horror was too much for him, and he died
within the next twenty-four hours. On the day after the installation
of the triumvirs (November 28th) the citizens were horrified to see an
edict fixed up in the Forum, detailing the causes of the executions
which were to follow, and offering a reward for the head of any one of
those named below—25,000 sesterces to a freeman, 10,000 and freedom to a
slave. All who aided or concealed a proscribed man were to suffer death
themselves. Below were two tablets, one for Senators and one for equites.
They contained 130 names, besides the original seventeen, to which were
shortly added 150 more. Additions were continually being made during the
following days, either from private malice or covetousness. In some cases
men were first killed and then their names inserted in the lists. The
edict made it the interest of slaves to betray their masters, against
whom perhaps in many cases these unfortunate men had a long list of
