injuries to avenge. They had now the fierce gratification of seeing their
oppressors grovelling at their feet. But it also placed a severe strain
on the affection of the nearest kinsmen whose lives were forfeited if
they concealed or aided the proscribed. The sale of confiscated property
at low rates gave opportunities for the covetous, and many a man perished
because he possessed house or land desired by Fulvia or some friend of
Antony. But though the terror revealed much meanness and treachery, it
also brought to light many instances of courage and devotion. Wives and
sons risked death for husbands and fathers; and there were slaves who
assumed the dress of their masters and died for them.

The massacre began with Salvius, though holding the sacrosanct office
of tribune. Two prætors—Minucius and L. Velleius—were cut down while
engaged in their courts. To shew how no connections, however high, were
to save any man, at the head of the list was a brother of Lepidus, an
uncle of Antony, a brother of Plancus, and the father-in-law of Asinius
Pollio. But as usual in times of such horror, many perished who from
their humble position or their youth could have had no share in politics.
The total number eventually proscribed, according to Appian, was “three
hundred Senators and about two thousand equites.” Livy says that there
were 130 names of Senators on the lists, and a large number (_plurimi_)
of equites. Livy is probably giving the number of Senators who actually
perished.[163] In Rome itself the terror was probably brief. It would not
take long to find those who stayed in the city; the gates and roads were
strictly guarded, and it was difficult to evade military vigilance. But
many were hiding in the country, and the search for them went on into
the first months of the next year, and all through Italy soldiers were
scouring towns, villages, woods, and marshes in search of the proscribed.
Probably the exact number of those executed was never known. But it seems
likely that about half escaped, some of whom in happier times rose to
high office. There were three possible places of refuge, the camp of M.
Brutus in Macedonia, of Cassius in Syria, and the fleet of Sext. Pompeius
in Sicily. Pompeius sent vessels to cruise round the southern coasts of
Italy and pick up refugees; and tried to counteract the edict by offering
those who saved any one of them double the sum set upon their heads by
the triumvirs. He was liberal in relieving their necessities, and found
commands or other employments for those of high rank.[164] At length,
early in B.C. 42 Lepidus informed the Senate that the proscriptions were
at an end. He seems to have meant by this that no new list was to be
issued, not that those already proscribed were to be pardoned; and Cæsar,
who was present, entered a protest against being bound even by this
declaration.[165]

[Sidenote: Protest of Ladies.]

In fact another list was published, but this time it was of properties to
be confiscated, not of lives to be taken. In spite of the already large
confiscations the triumviral government was in financial difficulties.
Confiscated properties were liable to reductions for the dowries of
widows, 10 per cent. to sons, and 5 per cent. to daughters.[166] These
claims were not always paid perhaps, but they sometimes were. Again,
besides the natural fall of prices caused by so much property coming
into the market at once, much of it was sold to friends and partisans at
great reductions, few venturing to bid against men in power or soldiers.
The treasury, therefore, was not enriched as much as might have been
expected; and as the triumvirs had two wars in the immediate future to
face, they were in great need of money. The tributum and tax on slaves
were reimposed, but failed to produce a surplus. A device therefore was
hit upon something like the fines on “Malignants” in England, under the
Commonwealth. Lists of persons more or less suspect were put up, who were
ordered to contribute a tenth of their property. Each man had to value
his own estate, and this gave rise to frequent accusations of fraud,
generally resulting in the confiscation of the whole. Others found it
impossible to raise the money without selling property, which could only
be done just then at a ruinous sacrifice. An alternative was offered to
such men which proved equally ruinous. They might surrender their whole
estate and apply for the restoration of a third. The treasury was not
likely to be prompt in completing the transaction, for it had first to
sell and satisfy charges on the estate, nor to take a liberal view of
the amount due to the owner. It was an encumbered estates act, under
which the margin of salvage was always small, and tended to disappear
altogether.[167] Among those thus proscribed were about fourteen hundred
ladies. They did not silently submit, but applied to Octavia, as well
as to Antony’s mother Iulia, and his wife Fulvia. By Octavia and Iulia
they were kindly received, but were driven from Fulvia’s door. Undismayed
they appeared before the tribunal of the triumvirs, where Hortensia,
daughter of the orator Hortensius, pleaded their cause with something
of her father’s eloquence. “If they were guilty,” she argued, “they
ought to have shared the fate of their relations. If not it was as
unjust to injure their property as their persons. They had no share in
political rights, and therefore were not liable to taxation. Women had
of old voluntarily contributed their personal ornaments to the defences
of the country; but they had never contributed, and, she hoped, never
would contribute to a civil war, or shew sympathy on either side.” The
triumvirs received the protest with anger, and ordered their lictors to
drive the ladies away. But they were struck by marks of disapproval among
the crowd; and next day a new edict was substituted, which contained
only four hundred names of women, and, instead of naming individual
men, imposed on all properties above 100,000 sesterces (about £800) an
immediate tax of 2 per cent. of the capital, and one year’s income for
the expenses of the war.[168]

[Sidenote: Responsibility of Augustus for the proscriptions.]

For a just view of the character of Augustus, it is important to decide
how far he acquiesced in the cruelties of the proscription. With the
general policy he seems to have been in full accord; and as far as a
complete vengeance on those implicated in the murder of Iulius was
concerned, he was no doubt inexorable. But his administration as sole
head of the state was so equitable and clement, that many found it
difficult to believe that he did more than tacitly acquiesce in the rest
of the proscriptions. Augustus himself, in the memoir left to be engraved
after his death, omits all mention of them, and conveniently passes
from the legal condemnation of the assassins to the assertion that he
spared the survivors of Philippi. Paterculus only alludes to them in a
sentence, which contains a skilful insinuation that Augustus only joined
in them under compulsion. Appian makes no distinction between the three.
He tells us, indeed, some stories of mercy shown by Augustus, and of his
expressing approbation of acts of fidelity on the part of friends or
slaves. But he also credits Antony with at least one act of a similar
kind. Plutarch says that most blame was thought to attach to Antony, as
being older than Cæsar and more influential than Lepidus. Dio goes more
fully into the question. He affirms that Antony and Lepidus were chiefly
responsible for the proscriptions, pointing out that Octavian by his own
nature, as well as his association with Iulius, was inclined to clemency;
and moreover, that he had not been long enough engaged in politics to
have conceived many enmities, while his chief wish was to be esteemed and
popular; and lastly, that when he got rid of these associates, and was in
sole power, he was never guilty of such crimes. The strongest of these
arguments is that which claims for Cæsar’s youth immunity from widespread
animosities; and it does seem probable that outside the actual assassins
and their immediate supporters, Augustus would not personally have cared
to extend the use of the executioner’s sword. But he cannot be acquitted
of a somewhat cynical indifference to the cruelties perpetrated under
the joint name and authority of the triumvirs. None of them have been
directly attributed to him, except perhaps in the case of his (apparently
unfaithful) guardian Toranius; but neither is there any record of his
having interfered to prevent them. Suetonius seems to give the truer
account, that he resisted the proscription at first, but, when it was
once decided upon, insisted that it should be carried out relentlessly.
The proscription was an odious crime; but a proscription that did not
fulfil its purpose would have been a monstrous blunder also. I do not,
however, admit Seneca’s criticism that his subsequent clemency was merely
“cruelty worn out.”[169] The change was one of time and circumstance.
Youth is apt to be hard-hearted. With happier surroundings and lengthened
experience his character and judgment ripened and mellowed.

[Sidenote: Death of Atia.]

While these horrors were just beginning Cæsar lost his mother Atia,
the tender and careful guide of his childhood and youth, the first of
his near kin to recognise and approve his high destiny. She died while
he was still consul, that is, between the 19th of August and the 27th
of November, B.C. 43. Devoted to her in her life Cæsar now obtained for
her the honours of a public funeral. During the campaign of Mutina she
was, it seems, at Rome; and when his estrangement from the Senate made
her position unpleasant or dangerous, she had taken sanctuary with the
Vestal Virgins accompanied by Octavia, and was ready to greet him when
he returned to Rome. Nicolas of Damascus gives an attractive picture
of Octavian’s relations with his mother; and even the uncomplimentary
Suetonius owns that his dutiful conduct to her had been exemplary.
She had brought up her son with strictness, and the author of the
_de oratoribus_ classes her with the mother of the Gracchi. But her
strictness had not forfeited her son’s affection, nor failed to impress
upon him a high sense of duty. Her second husband Philippus survived her
several years.[170]




CHAPTER V

PHILIPPI

    _Cum fracta virtus, et minaces_
    _turpe solum tetigere mento._


[Sidenote: M. Brutus and C. Cassius in the East.]

The first task of the Triumvirs, after securing their power at Rome, was
the restoration of unity and peace to the Empire, which was threatened
at two points: Brutus and Cassius were in arms in the East, Sext.
Pompeius in the West. The opposition of Brutus and Cassius seemed the
more formidable of the two. Brutus, indeed, after holding Macedonia
throughout B.C. 43, after capturing and eventually putting to death Gaius
Antonius, and after winning some laurels in contests with surrounding
barbarians, had towards the end of the year practically abandoned the
province and removed to Asia, in which a decree of the Senate had given
him proprætorial authority along with Cassius. But at Cyzicus and on
the coast of Bithynia he had collected a considerable fleet, and having
thus strengthened himself and levied large sums of money, he sent urgent
messages to Cassius to join him in the defence of the republic.

Meanwhile Cassius had done much towards securing the rest of the East to
their cause. At the end of B.C. 44 he had entered Palestine, and been
joined successively by the forces of L. Statius Murcus, proconsul of
Syria; of M. Crispus, proconsul of Bithynia; of Cæcilius Bassus, the old
Pompeian officer who had seduced the troops of Sextius Iulius from their
allegiance; and by four legions from Egypt under Aulus Allienus, whom
Dolabella had sent to bring them to himself. With twelve legions he had
shut up Dolabella at Laodicea-ad-Mare, aided by a fleet raised in part by
Lentulus, the proquæstor of Asia, and had eventually terrified him into
suicide. He had himself also, or by his legates, collected a fleet strong
enough to prevent Cleopatra sending aid to Antony and Octavian, while
part of it, under Statius Murcus and Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus, was to
watch the harbour of Brundisium and prevent the despatch of troops from
Italy.

In the spring of B.C. 42, therefore, when Brutus and Cassius met at
Smyrna they were both in possession of formidable forces, naval and
military, and Cassius at any rate was also well supplied with money. They
did not, however, at once push on to Macedonia, for they believed that
the danger threatened by Sext. Pompeius would delay the advance of the
Triumvirs. They therefore spent some months in farther securing the East.
Brutus proceeded to reduce the cities in Lycia, Cassius sailed against
Rhodes, while one of his legates invaded Cappadocia, and defeated and
killed King Ariobarzanes. Both encountered some resistance, but when they
met again in the summer at Sardis they had successfully carried out their
objects; and Cassius had refilled his exchequer by the taxes of Asia, the
towns in which had been compelled to pay nearly ten years’ revenue in
advance.

Having told off a portion of his fleet to keep up the watch over
Cleopatra and at Brundisium, the two proconsuls set out together for
Abydos, and thence crossed to Europe. They marched along the coast road,
formerly traversed by Persian invaders, their fleet also, like that of
the Persian king of old, coasting along parallel with their march, till
they came to the part of the Pangæan range which covers the ten miles
between Philippi and its harbour Neapolis (Datum). There they found the
road blocked by Gaius Norbanus and Decidius Saxa, with eight legions,
sent in advance by Antony. When they left the main road and attempted
to pass nearer Philippi they found the heights immediately south of the
town also guarded. They drove off the enemy and encamped on two hills
which they connected by a trench and stockade; and eventually farther
secured their position by occupying a line of hills commanding the road
to the sea. They thus kept up communication with the fleet at Thasos as a
base of supplies. Norbanus and Saxa did not venture to attack them, but
retired upon Amphipolis, and thence sent intelligence to Rome, meanwhile
keeping the enemy in check by skirmishing parties of cavalry. Brutus and
Cassius were in no hurry to advance, for they had an excellent position,
and were sure of supplies while in touch with their fleet; whereas their
opponents depended on the country, which was neither rich nor well
stocked. The fleet of Murcus and Domitius might also delay, and perhaps
prevent Antony and Cæsar from bringing reinforcements, while the fleet at
Thasos could stop supplies being conveyed by sea.

[Sidenote: The difficulties of Antony and Cæsar with Sextus Pompeius.]

Nor were these the only difficulties in the way of the Triumvirs. Ever
since the battle of Munda (B.C. 45) Sextus Pompeius had been leading
a piratical life in the Western Mediterranean. His forces had been
continually increased by fugitive Pompeians and by natives from Africa,
until he had become possessed of a formidable power against which the
successive governors of Southern Spain had been able to effect little.
After the death of Iulius Cæsar an attempt was made through Lepidus to
come to terms with him, and he had agreed to submit to the government on
condition of a _restitutio in integrum_, including the restoration of
his father’s property. But though Antony obtained a confirmation from
the Senate the arrangement was never carried out. Probably the immense
sum named as the value of the property—about five millions sterling—made
it impossible, especially when the money in the temple of Ops had been
squandered. Moreover Pompeius seems to have demanded the actual house
and estates of his father, and these were in Antony’s hands, who would
not easily surrender them. Sextus therefore stayed in Spain or with his
fleet. When the Senate broke with Antony it renewed negotiations with
Sextus, promised him the satisfaction of his claims, passed a vote of
thanks to him for services, and confirmed him in his command of all
Roman ships on active service.[171] The Triumvirs deposed him from this
command, and put his name on the proscription list. His answer was to
sail to Sicily, force Pompeius Bithynicus to surrender Messana, and take
possession of the island. Here he was joined by numerous refugees of the
proscribed and many skilful seamen from Africa and elsewhere. By thus
holding Sicily and Sardinia he could do much towards starving out Italy,
upon the southern shores of which he also made frequent descents. He
acted as an independent ruler, and presently put Bithynicus to death on a
charge of plotting against him.[172]

[Sidenote: The campaign of Philippi.]

Cæsar and Antony suspected Lepidus of keeping up communication with
Pompeius, and consequently he was practically shelved. He was to remain
at Rome to keep order and carry out formal duties, while Antony was to
transport his legions from Brundisium to attack Brutus and Cassius, and
Cæsar was to conduct the war against Sextus Pompeius. But the strength
of Pompeius seems not to have been fully realised. Cæsar despatched a
fleet under Q. Salvidienus to Sicily, while he himself went by land
to Rhegium. But Salvidienus was badly defeated by Pompeius and had to
retire to the Italian shore to refit,[173] and before Cæsar had time
to do anything more he was called to the aid of Antony, who was in
difficulties at Brundisium, the exit of the harbour being blocked by the
ships of Statius Murcus, presently reinforced by those of Ahenobarbus.
The arrival of Cæsar and his fleet enabled the transports to cross,
and Antony marched along the Egnatian Way to join his advanced army at
Amphipolis. Cæsar was once more attacked by illness and obliged to stay
at Dyrrachium; but hearing that Antony, on his arrival, had suffered
some reverses in cavalry skirmishes, he resolved to join him at all
hazards. It was indeed a crisis of the utmost importance to him. He was
leaving Italy exposed to a double danger, on the east from Murcus and
Ahenobarbus, on the south from Sextus Pompeius. If Antony were defeated
Cæsar would be in a most alarming position; if Antony won without him,
his own prestige would be damaged and he might have to take a second
place in the joint government. As before in the Spanish journey his
resolution conquered physical weakness, and he reached the seat of war
before any general engagement had taken place. He found the army somewhat
discouraged. Antony had left his heavy baggage at Amphipolis, which had
been secured by Decidius and Norbanus, and had advanced over the wide
plain (about sixty miles) to within a mile of the high ground on which
Brutus and Cassius were entrenched. But they were too strongly posted to
be attacked, and he had suffered some losses in his attempts to draw them
