down. His men were getting demoralised by the evidently superior position
of the enemy, who were protected on the right by mountains, and on their
left by a marsh stretching between them and the sea, so that it was
impossible to turn their position on either side. Delay was all in favour
of Brutus and Cassius, whose fleet afforded abundant provisions, while
Antony would have great difficulty in feeding his army during the winter,
and the season was already advanced. In mere numbers there was not much
difference. Both had nineteen legions; and, though those of Brutus were
not at their full strength, he and Cassius had 20,000 cavalry, as against
13,000 of Antony and Cæsar.

[Sidenote: First battle at Philippi.]

The first battle (late in October) was brought on by an attempt of
Antony’s to get across the marsh by a causeway which he had himself
constructed, and storm an earthwork which Cassius had thrown up to
prevent him. Repulsing a flank attack made by the division of Brutus, he
carried the earthwork and even took the camp of Cassius, who with his
main body retired to the heights nearer Philippi with heavy loss. But
Antony had also suffered severely, and the fate of the day could not be
considered decided until it was known how Brutus had fared, who after
the unsuccessful attack on Antony’s flank, had attacked Cæsar’s division
which was opposite him. In this last movement he had been entirely
successful. Cæsar’s camp had been stormed and his men driven into flight,
he himself being absent through illness. The result of this cross victory
was that both armies returned to their original positions. Antony,
finding that the left wing was defeated, did not venture to remain in the
camp of Cassius. Cassius might have returned to it, but for a mistake
which cost him his life. He was wrongly informed that Brutus had been
defeated, and being short-sighted he mistook a squadron of cavalry that
was riding up to announce Brutus’s success for enemies, and anticipated
what he supposed to be inevitable capture by suicide. Brutus, informed
of this, withdrew his men from the attack on Cæsar’s camp, and retired
behind their lines, occupying again Cassius’s abandoned quarters.

[Sidenote: Second battle at Philippi, November.]

Nearly at the same time as this indecisive battle the cause of the
triumvirs had suffered a disaster nearer home. A fleet of transports
conveying the Martia, another legion, and some cavalry was destroyed by
Murcus and Ahenobarbus, and the greater part of the men had been lost at
sea or forced to surrender. Though Brutus did not yet know this he held
his position for about a fortnight longer. But the tidings when they
came made it more than ever necessary for Antony and Cæsar to strike a
blow; for they were still more isolated than before and more entirely
cut off from supplies. On the other hand, the officers and men in the
army of Brutus were inspired by it with an eager desire to follow up
the good news by fighting a decisive battle. Brutus yielded against his
better judgment and drew out his men. Antony and Cæsar did the same. But
it was not until the afternoon was well advanced that the real fighting
began. After spending more time than usual in hurling volleys of pila
and stones, they drew their swords and grappled in a furious struggle at
close quarters. Both Antony and Cæsar were active in bringing up fresh
companies to fill up gaps made by the fallen. At last the part of the
line against which Cæsar was engaged began to give way, retiring step by
step, and fighting desperately all the while. But the order grew looser
and looser, until at length it broke into downright flight. The camp
of Brutus was stormed and his whole army scattered. Cæsar was left to
guard the captured camp, while Antony (as at Pharsalia) led the cavalry
in pursuit. He ordered his men to single out officers for slaughter or
capture, lest they should rally their men and make a farther stand. He
was particularly anxious to capture Brutus, perhaps as hoping to avenge
his brother. But in this his men were foiled by a certain Lucilius, who
threw himself in their way professing to be Brutus, and the mistake
was not discovered till he was brought to Antony. Brutus had, in fact,
escaped to high ground with four legions. He hoped with this force to
recapture his camp and continue the policy of wearing out the enemy by
delay. But a good look-out was maintained by Antony during the night, and
the next morning his officers told Brutus that they would fight no more,
but were resolved to try to save their lives by making terms with the
victors. Exclaiming that he was then of no farther use to his country,
Brutus called on his freedman Strato to kill him, which he immediately
did.

[Sidenote: Conduct of Cæsar after the victory.]

There is some conflict of testimony as to the severitie inflicted after
the victory. The bulk of the survivors with their officers submitted
and were divided between the armies of the two triumvirs. A certain
number who had been connected with the assassination and included in
the proscription lists felt that they had no mercy to expect, and saved
farther trouble by putting an end to their own lives. But some also, as
Favonius the Stoic, imitator of Cato, were executed. Suetonius attributes
to Cæsar not only special severity, but cruel and heartless insults to
those whom he condemned. To one man begging for burial he answered that
“that would be business of the birds.” A father and son begging their
lives he bade play at _morra_ for the privilege of surviving. And he
ordered the head of Brutus to be sent home that it might be placed at
the foot of Iulius Cæsar’s statue. As usual there remain some doubts as
to these stories. That of the father and son, for instance, is related
by Dio, but placed after Actium.[174] And the story as to the head of
Brutus is somewhat inconsistent with the honourable treatment of the
body attributed to Antony.[175] The refusal of funeral rites is contrary
to his own assertion in his autobiography; and, in the _Monumentum
Ancyranum_, he declares that he “spared all citizens.”[176] But it must
be conceded that until the assassins and their supporters were finally
disposed of he shewed himself relentless. The milder sentiments are those
of a later time. The plea of a duty to avenge his “father’s” murder may
mitigate, but cannot annul, his condemnation.

[Sidenote: Second division of the Empire, B.C. 42.]

The victory of Philippi reunited the eastern and western parts of the
Empire, and therefore necessitated a fresh distribution of spheres of
influence among the triumvirs. The new agreement was reduced to writing
and properly attested, partly that Cæsar might silence opposition at
Rome, but partly also because the two men had already begun to feel some
of their old distrust of each other. During the late campaign, when there
seemed some chance of defeat, Antony had expressed regret at having
embarrassed himself with Cæsar instead of making terms with Brutus and
Cassius, and such words, however hasty or petulant, would be sure to
reach Cæsar’s ears. The respect also shewn by Antony to the remains of
Brutus, and the evident tendency of the defeated party to prefer union
with him rather than with Cæsar, as well as the more generous terms which
he was willing to grant, must all have suggested to Cæsar the precarious
nature of the tie between them. It was necessary therefore to put the
arrangement now made beyond dispute.

The division did not, as two years later, distinguish between East and
West. It was still only the western half of the Empire which was to be
divided. Italy was to be treated as the centre of government, open to all
the triumvirs alike for recruiting and other purposes. The provinces were
to be administered in the usual way by governors approved of by them,
except that Antony was to have Gaul and Africa, Cæsar Spain and Numidia,
thus securing to each a government in the west and south roughly equal
in extent and in importance, now that Sicily and Sardinia were in the
hands of Sextus Pompeius and thus actually hostile to Italy. But the last
article in the agreement, though intended to provide only for a passing
state of affairs, did in fact foreshadow the division of the Empire into
East and West. By it Antony undertook to go at once to Asia to crush
the fragments of the republican party still in arms in the East, and to
collect money sufficient for the payment of the promised rewards to the
veterans. Cæsar, on the other hand, was to return to Italy to carry on
the war against Sextus Pompeius and arrange the assignation of lands.
Lepidus was still consul as well as triumvir, but if the suspicion of his
being in correspondence with Pompeius was confirmed he was to have no
province and was to be suppressed by Cæsar. If it did not turn out to
be true Antony undertook to hand over Africa to him. He was throughout
treated as subordinate—

              “a slight, unmeritable man,
    Meet to be sent on errands.”

The real governors of the Empire were to be Antony and Cæsar. The force
of circumstances ordained that for the next ten years Antony was to
govern the East and Cæsar the West. And as yet the heart and life of
the Empire was in the west. It was this, as much as the difference of
his character, which eventually secured to Cæsar the advantage over his
colleague and made him master of the whole.




CHAPTER VI

PERUSIA AND SICILY

    _actus cum freto Neptunius_
    _dux fugit ustis navibus._


[Sidenote: Augustus returns to Rome after Philippi, early in B.C. 41.]

The campaign which ended with the second battle at Philippi and the
death of Brutus had been won at the cost of much physical suffering to
Cæsar, who only completed his twenty-first year some days after it. He
had been in bad health throughout, barely able to endure the journey
across Macedonia, and only performing his military duties with the utmost
difficulty and with frequent interruptions. On his return journey he had
to halt so often from the same cause that reports of his death reached
Rome. The slowness with which he travelled also gave time for all kinds
of rumours to spread abroad as to farther severities to be exercised upon
the republican party on his return, and many of those who felt that they
were open to suspicion sought places of concealment for themselves or
their property.

[Sidenote: B.C. 41 Consuls L. Antonius Pietas, Serv. Vatia Isauricus II.
Allotting lands for the veterans.]

Cæsar sent reassuring messages to Rome, but he did not arrive in the city
till the beginning of the next year (B.C. 41). He found Lucius Antonius
consul, who had celebrated a triumph on the first day of the year for
some trifling successes in Gaul. The real control of affairs, however,
was being exercised by Fulvia, the masculine wife of Marcus Antonius,
widow successively of Clodius and Curio, against whom Lepidus had been
afraid or unable to act. Fulvia and Lucius professed to be safeguarding
the interests of Marcus and fulfilling his wishes, and Lucius adopted the
cognomen _Pietas_ as a sign of his fraternal devotion. But the moving
spirit throughout was Fulvia. Cæsar’s first business in Rome was the
allotment of land to the veterans. This had been begun a year before in
Transpadane Gaul, on the establishment of the Triumvirate, by Asinius
Pollio, left in command of that district; and Vergil has given us some
insight into the bitterness of feeling which it often roused:

    “Shall some rude soldier hold these new ploughed lands?
    Some alien reap the labours of our hands?
    Ah, civil strife, what fruit your jangling yields!
    Poor toilsome souls—for these we sowed our fields!”

When there was public land available for the purpose, the allotment could
generally be made without much friction; but as there was not enough of
it, the old precedent of “colonisation” was followed. A number of Italian
towns (nineteen in all) were selected, in the territories of which the
veterans of a particular legion were to be settled as _coloni_, with a
third of the land assigned for their support. No doubt in each case the
lands held by men who had served in the opposite camp were first taken as
being lawfully confiscated; but it must often have happened that there
was not enough of such lands, and that those of persons not implicated
in the civil wars were seized wholly or in part. In such cases it was
understood that the owners were to be compensated by money arising from
the sale of other confiscations. But this money was either insufficient
or long in coming. Petitions and deputations remonstrating against the
injustice poured in upon Cæsar, who, on the other hand, had to listen to
many complaints from the veterans of inadequate provision made for them
and of promises still unfulfilled.

[Sidenote: L. Antonius and Fulvia take advantage of the discontent.]

This was a sufficiently thorny task in itself. But it was made still
more irksome by L. Antonius and Fulvia. Their pretext was that the
veterans in Antony’s legions were less liberally treated than those
in Cæsar’s own; and Lucius claimed, as consul and as representing his
brother, the right of settling the allotments of Antony’s veterans. Cæsar
retorted by complaining that the two legions to which he was entitled
by his written agreement with Antony had not been handed over to him.
Starting from these counter charges they were soon at open enmity,
embittered by the frequent collision between the constitutional authority
of the consul and the extra-constitutional _imperium_ of the triumvir.
Lucius and Fulvia made capital out of this, maintaining that Marcus was
ready to lay down his extraordinary powers as triumvir, and to return to
Rome as consul. Fulvia was credited with a more personal motive. Antony’s
infatuation for Cleopatra was becoming known in Rome, and it was believed
that Fulvia designedly promoted civil troubles in the hope of inducing
her husband to return.[177] At any rate she and Lucius took advantage
of the ill-feeling against Cæsar caused by the confiscation of land.
They feigned to plead for the dispossessed owners, maintaining that the
confiscations had already produced enough for the payment of all claims,
and that, if it were found that this was not so, Marcus would bring home
from Asia what would cover the balance. They thus made Cæsar unpopular
with both sides—with the veterans who thought that he might have
satisfied their claims in full; with the dispossessed owners, who, over
and above the natural irritation at their loss, thought that his measure
had not been even necessary, and that he might have paid the veterans
without mulcting them, or might have waited for the money from Asia.
Specially formidable was the anger of landowners who were in the Senate.
The discontent was increased by the hardness of the times; for corn
was at famine price owing to Sextus Pompeius and Domitius Ahenobarbus
infesting the Sicilian and Ionian seas. Cæsar was therefore in a serious
difficulty. Unable to satisfy veterans and Senators at the same time, he
found how powerless is mere military force against widespread and just
resentment. His one answer to senatorial remonstrance had been, “But how
am I to pay the veterans?” Now, however, he found it necessary to let
alone the properties of Senators, the dowries of women, and all holdings
less than the share of a single veteran. This again led to mutinies
among the troops, who murdered some of their tribunes, and were within
a little of assassinating Cæsar himself. They were only quieted by the
promise that all their relations, and all fathers and sons of those who
had fallen in the war, should retain lands assigned to them. This again
enraged a number of the losers, and fatal encounters between owners and
intruding “colonists” became frequent. The soldiers had the advantage of
training, but the inhabitants were more numerous, and attacked them with
stones and tiles from the housetops, both in Rome and the country towns.
The burning of houses became so common that it was found necessary to
remit a whole year’s rent of houses let for 500 denarii (£20) and under
in the city, and a fourth part in the rest of Italy.

[Sidenote: Other provocations offered to Augustus. He takes steps to
protect himself.]

Cæsar was also made to feel that attachment to Antony meant hostility to
himself; for two legions despatched by him to Spain were refused passage
through the province by Q. Fufius Calenus and Ventidius Bassus, Antony’s
legates in Gallia Transalpina.[178] Alarmed by the aspect of affairs,
he tried to come to some understanding with Lucius and Fulvia, but
found them resolutely hostile. The mediation of officers in the army,
of private friends and Senators proved of no avail; though he produced
the agreement drawn up between Marcus and himself, and offered to allow
the Senate to arbitrate on their disputes. Satisfied that by the refusal
of this offer Lucius and Fulvia had put themselves in the wrong, he
determined to rely upon his army. For Lucius had been collecting men
among those offended by Cæsar, and Fulvia, accompanied by many Senators
and equites, had occupied Præneste with a body of troops, to which she
regularly gave the watchword as their commander, appeared among them
wearing a sword, and frequently harangued the men.

The men of Cæsar’s army, no doubt acting on a hint from himself, now
took the matter into their own hands. They suddenly entered Rome,
affirming that they wished to consult the Senate and people. Assembling
on the Capitol, with such citizens as ventured to come, they ordered the
agreement between Cæsar and Antony to be read, voted its confirmation,
constituted themselves judges between the disputants, and named a day
on which Fulvia, Lucius, and Cæsar were to appear before them at Gabii.
Having ordered these resolutions to be written out and deposited with
the Vestals, they peaceably dispersed. Cæsar was present and of course
consented to appear; but Lucius and Fulvia, though at first promising
to attend at Gabii, did not do so. They scoffed at the idea of a mob
of soldiers, a _senatus caligatus_[179] (a “Tommy-Atkins-parliament”),
presuming to speak for Senate and people. They were therefore voted in
their absence to be in the wrong, and Cæsar’s _acta_ were confirmed.
The show of legality thus gained for him was used by his officers to
