her and their child with her brother.

[Sidenote: Continued war with Sextus Pompeius, B.C. 37-36.]

Cæsar’s plan of campaign for B.C. 37 was that on the 1st of July a
combined attack should be made on Sicily, from three points—from Africa
by Lepidus, from Tarentum by Statilius Taurus, and from Puteoli by
himself. Another violent storm baffled this plan; Cæsar had to take
refuge at Elea; Taurus had to put back to Tarentum; while, though
he reached Sicily, Lepidus returned without effecting anything of
importance. Another winter and spring had to be spent on preparations,
and it was not till the autumn of B.C. 36 that the final engagements
took place. At that time Pompeius’s fleet was stationed along the
Sicilian coast from Messana to Tyndaris, with headquarters at Mylæ.
After reconnoitring the position from the Æolian islands, Cæsar left the
main attack to Agrippa, while he himself joined Taurus at Leucopetra.
Agrippa repulsed the enemy’s ships, but not decisively enough to enable
him to pursue them to their moorings. It was sufficient, however, to
enable Cæsar to cross to Tauromenium, leaving his main body of men on
the Italian shore under the command of Valerius Messalla. Here he soon
found himself in the greatest danger. Pompeius’s fleet was not held up
by Agrippa, as Cæsar thought, but appeared off Tauromenium in force.
Messalla was unable to cross to his relief, and a body of Pompeian
cavalry attacked him while his men were making their camp. Cæsar himself
managed to get back to Italy, but he left three legions, 500 cavalry, and
2,000 veterans, under Cornificius, encamped near Tauromenium, surrounded
by enemies, and without means of supply. He himself landed in a forlorn
condition, with only one attendant, and with great difficulty found his
way to the camp of Messalla. Thence he sent urgent orders to Agrippa to
despatch a force to the relief of Cornificius; commanded Messalla to send
for reinforcements from Puteoli; while Mæcenas was sent to Rome with full
powers to suppress the disorders likely to occur when the ill-success
against Pompeius was known.

The force despatched by Agrippa found Cornificius and his men in a
state of desperate suffering in the difficult district of Mount Ætna,
and conveyed them to the fleet off Mylæ. So far, though Pompeius had
maintained his reputation at sea, he had not shown himself able to follow
up a success on land. And now the tide turned against him. Agrippa seized
Tyndaris, in which Pompeius had large stores, and Cæsar landed twenty-one
legions there, with 2,000 cavalry and 5,000 light-armed troops. His plan
was to assault Messana while Agrippa engaged the fleet. There was a good
road from Tyndaris to Messana (_via Valeria_), but Pompeius still held
Mylæ and other places along the coast with the defiles leading to them.
He was misled, however, by a report of an immediate attack by Agrippa,
and, withdrawing his men from these defiles and strong posts, allowed
Cæsar to occupy them. Finding the report to be false, he again attempted
to intercept Cæsar as he was marching with some difficulty over the
district of Mount Myconium. But his general (Tisienus) failed to take
advantage of Cæsar’s unfavourable position, who, having meanwhile been
joined by Lepidus, encamped under the walls of Messana. He was now strong
enough on land to send detachments to occupy the various towns from which
Pompeius drew supplies; and therefore it was necessary for the latter
to abandon Sicily, or to scatter the fleet of Agrippa and so open the
sea to his transports. In a second battle off Mylæ, however, the fleet
of Pompeius was nearly annihilated, and though he escaped himself into
Messana, his land forces under Tisienus surrendered to Cæsar. When he
discovered this Pompeius, without waiting for the eight legions which
he still had at Lilybæum, collected seventeen ships which had survived
the battle and fled to Asia, hoping that Antony in gratitude for former
services would save and possibly employ him.

[Sidenote: Deposition of Lepidus.]

The danger which for so many years had hung like a cloud about the shores
of Italy was thus at an end. But there was one more danger still to be
surmounted before Cæsar’s authority was fully established in Sicily. The
eight Pompeian legions from Lilybæum under Plennius presently arrived at
Messana. Finding Pompeius fled, as Cæsar happened to be absent, Plennius
handed them over to Lepidus, who was on the spot. Lepidus added them
to his own forces, and being thus strengthened, conceived the idea of
adding Sicily to his province of Africa. It had not been definitely
included in any of the triumviral agreements; he had been the first to
land there, and had in the course of his march forced or persuaded many
cities to submit,—why should he have less authority to deal with it than
Cæsar, whose office was the same as his own? He had originally bargained
for Narbonensis and Spain: he had been shifted to Africa without being
consulted, and his provinces had been taken over by Cæsar. He was now
at the head of twenty-two legions, and would no longer be treated as a
subordinate. His arguments were sound; but they needed to be backed by
a determination as fixed as that of his rival, and, above all, by the
loyalty of his army. Neither of these advantages were his. In a stormy
interview with Cæsar he shewed that he could scold as loudly as another.
But when they had parted, he failed from indolence or blindness to detect
that Cæsar’s agents were undermining the fidelity of his men, especially
in the Pompeian legions, by informing them that without Cæsar’s assent
the promises made them by Lepidus would not be held valid. On his next
visit to the camp of Lepidus with a small bodyguard, Cæsar was mobbed by
the soldiers, and even had some of his guard killed, but when in revenge
for this he invested Lepidus with his main army, the forces of the latter
began quickly to melt away, and before many days he was compelled to
throw himself at Cæsar’s feet. He was forced to abdicate the triumvirate,
and sent to reside in Italy, where he remained till his death (B.C. 13),
in a private capacity and subject to constant mortifications. He retained
indeed the office of Pontifex Maximus, because of certain religious
difficulties as to its abdication, but he was never allowed to exercise
any but the most formal functions. This treatment of a colleague was not
generous; but the whole career of Lepidus since the beginning of the
civil war had been weak and shifty. He was “the greatest weathercock in
the world” (_ventosissimus_),[190] as Decimus Brutus told Cicero, and he
certainly presents the most pitiful figure of all the leading men of the
day.

[Sidenote: The fate of Sextus Pompeius, B.C. 35.]

The old policy of Philippi and Perusia was followed as regards the
forces of Pompeius. Senators and equites were, it is to be feared, in
many cases put to the sword; while the rank and file were admitted into
Cæsar’s army, and an amnesty was granted to those Sicilian towns which
had submitted either to Pompeius or Lepidus. Africa and Sicily Cæsar
took over as his part of the Empire and appointed proprætors to each.
He did not attempt to pursue Sextus Pompeius; he preferred that Antony
should have the responsibility and perhaps the odium of dealing with him.
In fact, he did some years afterwards make his execution a ground of
complaint against Antony. Yet Antony seems to have had little choice in
the matter. For Pompeius acted in Asia much as he had acted in Sicily
and Italy, capturing towns and plundering ships, while sending peaceful
embassies to Antony, offering to serve him against Cæsar. Being at last
compelled to surrender to Amyntas (made king of Pisidia by Antony), and
being by him delivered to Antony’s legate Titius, he was taken to Miletus
and there put to death. But it was, and still remains, uncertain whether
this was done by Antony’s order.

He was just forty, and had led a strange life since he witnessed his
father’s death from the ship off the coast of Egypt. He seems to have
had some generous qualities which attached men to him. But the times
were out of joint, and he was compelled to live the life of a pirate
and freebooter, having a grievance against every successive party that
gained power at Rome, trusting none, and feeling no obligation to treat
them as fellow citizens or even as noble enemies. He seems to have missed
more than one chance of crushing Cæsar; but his troops, though numerous,
were fitted neither by spirit nor by discipline to encounter regularly
trained legions in open fight. We cannot withhold a certain admiration
for the courage and energy which maintained him as virtual ruler of no
inconsiderable portion of the Roman Empire for nearly twelve years.

[Illustration: AUGUSTUS ADDRESSING TROOPS.

_Photographed from the Statue in the Vatican by Edne. Alinari._

_To face page 108._]




CHAPTER VII

ACTIUM

    _Altera iam teritur bellis civilibus aetas._
    _Sævis Liburnis, scilicet invidens,_
    _privata deduci superbo_
    _non humilis mulier triumpho._


[Sidenote: The early manhood of Augustus and its fruits.]

When Sextus fled from Sicily Cæsar was about to complete his 27th year.
It was nearly nine years since, while little more than a boy, he had
first boldly asserted himself in opposition to men more than twice his
own age, and had forced those who had been statesmen before he was born
to regard him as their champion or respect him as their master. Since
that time he had had little rest from grave anxieties or war. At Mutina,
Philippi, Perusia, and in Sicily, he had tasted danger and disaster as
well as victory; and had more than once been in imminent hazard. These
fatigues had been made more trying by frequent illness, apparently
arising from a sluggish liver, to which he had been subject from boyhood.
Through all he had been supported by an indomitable persistence and a
passionate resolve to avenge his adoptive father, all the more formidable
perhaps in a character naturally cold and self-contained. As he went on
there gradually awoke in him a nobler ambition, that of restoring and
directing the distracted state. Neither now nor afterwards do the more
vulgar attributes of supreme power—wealth, luxury, and adulation—seem to
have had charms for him. He felt the governing power in him, he believed
in his “genius,” what we might call his “mission,” and the difficulties
of a divided rule became more and more clear to him. From this time,
therefore, he used every means which wise statesmanship or crafty policy
could suggest to rid himself of the remaining partner in the Triumvirate,
and to gain a free hand in the work of restoration which he had already
begun.

[Sidenote: Marriage with Livia, B.C. 38.]

In private life he had taken a step which was the source of a lifelong
happiness to him. The political marriage with Scribonia in B.C. 40,
contracted with the idea of conciliating Sextus Pompeius, had been ended
by divorce on the very day of the birth of his only daughter Iulia.
The reason alleged was her disagreeable disposition; but, besides the
change in the political situation, there was another reason of a more
personal nature. The peace of Misenum had permitted many partisans of
Brutus, Cassius, or Lucius Antonius, who had fled to Sextus Pompeius,
to return to Rome. Among others came Tiberius Nero,[191] with his young
wife, Livia Drusilla. Unless statues and coins are more than usually
false, she was possessed of rare beauty. In B.C. 38 she was twenty years
old, and had one son (the future Emperor Tiberius) now in his fourth
year, and was within three months of the birth of her second son Drusus.
Even to the lax notions of divorce and re-marriage then current this
seemed somewhat scandalous. A year was held to be the necessary interval
for a woman between one marriage and another. But the object of this
convention was to prevent ambiguity as to the paternity of children; and
when Cæsar consulted the pontifices, they told him that, if there was no
doubt as to the paternity of the child with which Livia was pregnant,
the marriage might lawfully take place at once. No opposition seems to
have been made by Livia’s husband, who was at least twenty years her
senior.[192] He acted as a father in giving her to her new husband, and
entertained the bridal pair at a banquet. The marriage was so prompt
that a favourite page of Livia’s, seeing her take her place on the same
dinner couch as Cæsar, whispered to his mistress that she had made a
mistake, for her husband was on the other couch. On the birth of Drusus,
Cæsar sent the infant to its father, thus complying with the conditions
of the pontifices. That the two men should have been on good terms
is not incredible in view of the prevailing sentiment as to divorce.
We find Cicero, for instance, writing effusively to Dolabella almost
directly after he had compelled his daughter to divorce him for gross
misconduct, and there are other instances. At any rate Tiberius Nero, on
his death-bed in B.C. 33, left the guardianship of his sons to Cæsar; and
in spite of such a beginning the marriage proved permanently happy. Cæsar
was devoted to Livia to the day of his death; his last conscious act was
to kiss her lips.[193]

[Sidenote: Honours voted to Cæsar.]

The victory in Sicily left him supreme in the West, and he at once
devoted himself to the re-establishment of order and prosperity. The
relief to Italy and Rome was immense; for with Pompeius master of the
sea the city was always in danger of famine, and the Italian coast of
devastation. This feeling of relief found expression in the proceedings
of the Senate, which now began those votes of special honours and powers
to Cæsar, which in the course of the next ten or twelve years gradually
clothed him with every attribute of supremacy in the state. On his return
from Sicily he was decreed an ovation, as after Philippi,[194] as well
as statues and a triumphal arch. On the day of the victory over Pompeius
(2nd of September), there were to be _feriæ_ and _supplicationes_ for
ever; he and his wife and family were to be feasted on the Capitol;
and he was to have the perpetual right of wearing the laurel wreath of
victory. He refused the office of Pontifex Maximus, as long as Lepidus
lived, but he accepted the privileges of the tribuneship—the personal
sanctity which put any one injuring or molesting him under a curse, and
the right of sitting with the tribunes in the Senate. This it seems
gave him practically the full _tribunicia potestas_ within the city.
But it was a novel measure, and its full consequences were not perhaps
foreseen.[195] He had twice before wished to be elected tribune, but his
“patriciate” stood in his way. This was meant as a kind of compromise,
and it furnishes the keynote to his later plans for absorbing the powers
of the republican offices.

[Sidenote: Measures of conciliation and restoration.]

[Sidenote: The wars for security of frontiers.]

Cæsar’s chief difficulties now came from the large military forces of
which he found himself possessed, either by his own enlistment or from
that of the various defeated leaders. To disband them was neither safe in
view of possible complications with Antony, nor possible without finding
large sums of money or great tracts of unoccupied land with which to
reward the men; whereas his object now was to put an end to confiscation,
fines, and unusual imposts, and to bring back confidence and security.
After suppressing more than one incipient mutiny, he contrived to secure
enough land for those who had served their full time, partly by purchases
from Capua, where there was still a good deal of unassigned land. He
repaid the colony by granting it revenues from lands at Cnossus in
Crete, which had become _ager publicus_ on the defeat of the pirates, and
on some of which a Roman colony was not long afterwards established.[196]
Some of the men, again, who had been most clamorous and mutinous he sent
to Gaul as a _supplementum_ to colonies already existing, or to found
new colonies.[197] He was thus able to make remission of taxation, as
well as of arrears due from the lists of forfeiture published by the
triumvirs. His enemies said that his object was to throw the odium of
their original imposition upon Antony and Lepidus; or to make a merit of
necessity, since in most cases it would have been impossible to collect
the money. These motives may have had a share in his policy, but he
doubtless also wished to restore confidence and cause an oblivion of
the miseries of the civil wars. For the soldiers who remained various
other employments were found. The weakness of the central government had
long been shewn by the existence of marauding bands in various parts
of Italy. The civil wars had aggravated the evil, till travelling had
become dangerous almost everywhere, and even the streets of Rome were
unsafe. Cæsar now organised a police force of soldiers under Sabinus
Cotta to patrol the city and Italy, and within a few months the evil
was much mitigated.[198] Besides this, Statilius Taurus was sent with
an army to restore order in the two African provinces—Proconsularis and
Numidia.[199] Another expedition was sent against the Salassi, inhabiting
the modern Val d’Aosta, who had for two years been holding out against
Antistius Vetus. He had driven them into their mountain fastnesses; but
when he left the district they once more descended and expelled the Roman
garrisons. The war was entrusted to Valerius Messalla, who reduced them
at least to temporary submission (B.C. 35-34).[200] Another similar war
was that against the Iapydes, living in what is now Croatia, who in their
marauding expeditions had come as far as Aquileia and plundered Roman
colonies. To this Cæsar went in person. He destroyed their capital,
Metulum, on the Colapis (mod. _Kolpa_), after a desperate resistance, in
the course of which he was somewhat severely injured by the fall of a
bridge. The rest of the country then submitted.[201] The Iapydes had no
doubt provoked the attack. But that does not seem to be the case with the
Pannonians, whom Cæsar proceeded to invade. They were a mixed Illyrian
and Celtic tribe, dwelling in forests and detached villages without great
towns, and appear to have lived peaceably. But Cæsar resolved to take
their one important town, Siscia, at the junction of the Kolpa and Save,
partly as a convenient magazine in wars against the Daci, and partly for
the mere object of keeping his army employed and paid at the expense
