of a conquered country. The siege of the town lasted thirty days, and
after its fall he returned to Rome, leaving Fufius Geminus to continue
the campaign. So again in the spring of B.C. 34 Agrippa was sent against
the Dalmatians, and when later in the season he was joined by Cæsar
in person, their chief towns were taken and burnt; and this people,
who since their defeat of Gabinius in B.C. 44-43, had been practically
independent, had again to submit and pay tribute, with ten years’
arrears, and restore the standards taken from Gabinius. Their submission
was followed by that of other tribes, and by the middle of B.C. 33, the
whole of Illyricum was restored to obedience.

These were the sort of successes to make a man popular at Rome; for they
were not costly in blood or treasure, and they affected the interests
of a large number of merchants and men of business. Nor was this all.
One of his legates, Statilius Taurus, was so successful in Africa, and
another, C. Norbanus, in Spain, that both were decreed triumphs in B.C.
34, and in the same year Mauretania was made a Roman province. Cæsar had
declined a triumph after the Pannonian war, but accepted honours for
Octavia and Livia, who were exempted from the _tutela_, to which all
women were subject; and during these two years his name was becoming
associated with success and with the expansion of the Empire and of trade.

[Sidenote: Improvements in the city.]

This was accompanied by restorations and improvements in the city
calculated to appeal still more strongly to popular imagination. In B.C.
33 Agrippa as ædile reformed the water supply of Rome, constructing 700
basins, 500 fountains, and repairing the aqueducts.[202] He also cleansed
the cloacæ, adorned the circus, distributed oil and salt free, and opened
the baths gratis throughout his year of office, besides throwing among
the spectators at the theatre _tesseræ_ (tickets) entitling the holders
to valuable presents. Cæsar himself, who was consul for a few months at
the beginning of B.C. 33, erected the Porticus Octaviæ, named in honour
of his sister, with the spoils of the Illyrian and Pannonian wars,[203]
and began the building of the temple of Apollo and the two libraries, on
the site bought for a house on the Palatine before B.C. 36, when that of
Hortensius had been granted to him by the Senate,[204] and while he was
still living in the house of Calvus near the Forum.

[Sidenote: The contrast of Antony’s career.]

[Sidenote: The Parthians.]

These successes in the Western provinces, combined with such costly
improvements in the city, impressed (as it was intended that they should)
the minds of the people in Rome with the feeling that Cæsar’s name was
the best guarantee for the era of peace and prosperity which seemed
at last to be succeeding the ruin and horror of civil war. In strong
contrast—carefully emphasized by Cæsar and his friends—were the military
expeditions in the East, and the extravagance of Antony’s infatuation for
Cleopatra in Egypt. In B.C. 40 he had been roused from the intoxication
of love and revelry in Alexandria to find Syria in the hands of the
Parthian Pacorus, son of Orodes, and of Labienus, son of the old legate
of Iulius, who had joined the enemy after the battle of Philippi. They
had defeated and killed his legate, Decidius Saxa, and taken possession
of the province. It is true that next year, B.C. 39, P. Ventidius drove
away Labienus, and in B.C. 38 defeated the Parthians and killed Pacorus.
But Antony was jealous of Ventidius, deposed him from his command, and
went in person to besiege the remains of the Parthian army in Samosata,
where they had been received by Antiochus, king of Commagene. He failed
to take the town, and though in his despatch he took all the credit of
previous successes, the truth was well known in Rome. After his failure
at Samosata he made somewhat inglorious terms with Antiochus, and going
off to meet Cæsar at Tarentum left C. Sosius in charge of Syria. Sosius
put down an insurrection in Judæa and established Herod as king (B.C.
38-7). But in B.C. 36 Antony suffered severe reverses in an expedition
against Phraates, who had just succeeded his father Orodes as king of
Parthia. One success, however, in the course of an inglorious campaign
enabled him to send home laurelled despatches, the real value of which
Cæsar and his friends took care should be known. In B.C. 35 he began
carving out a kingdom for his elder son by Cleopatra, and making
preparations for an expedition against the king of Armenia, whom he
accused of failing in his duty of supporting him in the previous year.
Having first made a treaty of friendship with the king of Media, in B.C.
34 he invaded Armenia, and getting possession of the person of the king
by an act of treachery which shocked Roman sentiment—not very scrupulous
in such matters—he brought him in silver chains to Alexandria.

[Sidenote: Cleopatra.]

Thus Antony’s career as an administrator and defender of the Empire
was rightly or wrongly looked upon as comparing unfavourably with that
of Cæsar. But still more shocking to Roman feeling was his position in
Cleopatra’s court. Though the moral standard at Rome was far from high,
it was rigid in regard to certain details. Just as a valid marriage
could only be contracted with a woman who was a _civis_, so for a man
in high position to live openly with a foreign mistress, however high
her rank, was peculiarly scandalous. The beloved Emperor Titus, a
hundred years later, had to give way to this sentiment and dismiss his
Idumæan mistress. But that a Roman imperator should not only have such a
connection with a “barbarous” queen, but should act as her officer and
courtier; that she should have a bodyguard of Roman soldiers; should give
the watchword to them as their sovereign; and should even employ them to
deal with what in one sense or another was Roman territory—this seemed an
outrage of the worst kind. In a poem written it seems while the campaign
at Actium was still undecided, but when rumours of Antony’s defeat were
reaching Rome, Horace well expresses the disgust with which the position
conceded to Cleopatra by Antony’s fondness was regarded:

    False, false the tale our grandsons will declare—
    That Romans to a woman fealty sware;
    Shouldered their pikes; presented arms; and did
    Whate’er her wrinkled eunuchs deigned to bid:
    Or that among our Roman flags were seen
    The gauzy curtains of her palanquin.”[205]

Antony himself made no concealment as to the queen’s connection with
the army. After his disastrous expedition of B.C. 36-5, Cleopatra
supplied him with money, and he told his men when paying them that
they were receiving it from her. The connection also involved a breach
with Cæsar. Their friendship—always doubtful—had been patched up from
time to time by formal reconciliations; in B.C. 43 after Mutina; in
B.C. 40 at Brundisium; and in B.C. 37 at Tarentum. For a time Antony
had found great pleasure in the society of Octavia, with whom he lived
for a time at Athens. But after the meeting at Tarentum he left Octavia
with her brother on his return to the East, and soon fell again under
Cleopatra’s spell, who, though not beautiful, fascinated him by her art
and infinite variety. When in B.C. 35 Octavia, trying to effect another
reconciliation, went to Athens, taking money and soldiers for him from
her brother, Antony accepted the gifts, but sent her word that she was
to return to Rome. Cæsar would have had her repudiate him at once, but
she seems to have been sincerely attached to him, and to have shrunk
from the idea of an insult to herself being made an occasion of civil
war. She persisted in living in his town house, and in bringing up with
liberality, not only her own children by him, but also Antony’s children
by Fulvia.

[Sidenote: Final breach between Cæsar and Antony.]

But after his return from the Armenian expedition (B.C. 34) Antony became
still more infatuated with Cleopatra. He publicly gave her the title of
“Queen of Queens,” and her eldest son the name of Cæsarion and “King
of Kings”; while to his two sons and daughter by Cleopatra he assigned
kingdoms in Syria, Armenia, Libya, and Cyrene. He had the assurance to
write to the Senate asking for the confirmation of these _acta_. When
his two friends, C. Sosius and Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus entered on their
consulship (1st of January, B.C. 32), they resolved to suppress this
despatch, in spite of Cæsar’s wishes; but they communicated to the Senate
his message that the second period of the Triumvirate having expired
(on the last day of B.C. 33), he had no desire for its renewal. He did
not, however, lay down his imperium, and the object of this declaration
was to embroil Cæsar with the Senate, should he wish to retain his
extraordinary powers. Ahenobarbus, indeed, had had enough of civil war
and wished to take no step likely to bring it about. But Sosius made
an elaborate speech in praise of Antony, and attacking, or at least
depreciating, Cæsar; and was only prevented from bringing in a motion
in Antony’s favour by the intervention of a tribune. A few days after
this Cæsar (who had not been present on the 1st of January) summoned the
Senate, and delivered a speech from the consular bench, which though
studiously moderate as regards himself, was very outspoken as regards
Sosius and Antony. No one ventured to reply, and the Senate was dismissed
with the assurance that Cæsar would produce proofs of what he had said
about Antony. The two consuls, without taking any farther step, left
Rome privately and joined Antony in Alexandria. They were followed by a
considerable number of Senators, Cæsar giving out that they went with his
full consent, and declaring that others might go if they chose.

[Sidenote: The grievances of either side.]

[Sidenote: War proclaimed against Cleopatra, B.C. 32.]

This was a division of the governing body similar to that of B.C. 49-8,
and it was evident that a civil war was imminent. Sentiment was by no
means all on one side at Rome, as is proved by the numbers of the Senate
who crossed to Antony. Party feeling, in fact, was so keen that the very
boys in the streets divided themselves into Cæsarians and Antonians;[206]
and both leaders shewed great eagerness by arguments and declarations to
put themselves in the right. Antony’s grievances against Cæsar were:
(1) that he deprived Lepidus of Africa without consulting him; (2) that
he had not shared with him the countries formerly controlled by Sextus
Pompeius; (3) that he enrolled soldiers in Italy without sending him
the contingents due by their agreement. Cæsar’s against Antony were
that he was occupying Egypt (not a Roman province) without authority;
had executed Sextus Pompeius, whom he (Cæsar) had wished to spare; had
disgraced the Roman name by his conduct to the king of Armenia, by his
connection with Cleopatra, and by bestowing kingdoms on his children by
her; and, lastly, had wronged him by acknowledging Cæsarion as a son of
Iulius Cæsar. Letters and messages were interchanged for some months on
these and other points, both trying to justify themselves. Antony, in
one letter at least, preserved by Suetonius, ridicules in the coarsest
terms what he regards as Cæsar’s hypocritical or prudish objection to his
connection with the queen. But at length Cæsar found means to discredit
Antony in the eyes of the Senators, and to convince them that they must
prevent an invasion of Italy by a proclamation of war against Cleopatra,
which would be understood to be against Antony. He did this by using two
of Antony’s officers who had quarrelled with him and returned to Rome—M.
Titius and L. Munatius Plancus. The latter, Cicero’s correspondent,
the governor of Celtic Gaul in B.C. 44, and consul in B.C. 42, had
joined Antony in Alexandria as his _legatus_, and had been much in his
confidence. He is held up to scorn by contemporary writers as a monster
of fickleness and an ingrained traitor, and his thus turning upon Antony
was regarded with much contempt even by the Cæsarians. The story he and
his companion had to tell, however, served Cæsar’s turn. They brought
word that, on hearing of his speech in the Senate, Antony had publicly
divorced Octavia in the presence of the Senators, and had announced that
he intended to undertake a war against him. They also told how Antony
styled Cleopatra his queen and sovereign, gave her a bodyguard of Roman
soldiers, with her name on their shields; how he escorted her to the
forum and sat by her side on the seat of justice; how, when she rode
in her chair he walked on foot by her side among the eunuchs; how he
called the general’s quarters or prætorium “the Palace,” wore an Egyptian
scimitar and a robe embroidered with gold, and sat on a gilded chair;
and how some religious mummeries had been played, in which he took the
part of Osiris, she of the Moon and Isis. The Roman world believed that
Antony was bewitched by Cleopatra; and the serious consequences likely to
ensue were made more manifest by his will, of which Augustus got either
a copy or an account of its contents from Plancus, and read it publicly
from the Rostra. In it Antony affirmed the legitimacy of Cæsarion, gave
enormous legacies to his children by Cleopatra, and ordered his body to
be buried with that of the queen’s in the royal mausoleum. Altogether
people began to believe the report that he meant to hand over the Empire,
even Rome itself, to Cleopatra, and to transfer the seat of government to
Alexandria. There was one of those outbursts of feeling which carries all
before it. Even those who had been neutral, or inclined to be suspicious
of Cæsar, turned violently against Antony. He was deposed from the
consulship for B.C. 31, to which he had been elected, and declared to be
divested of imperium. It seems probable that he was not at first declared
a _hostis_,[207] but war was voted against Cleopatra. It was enough
for his enemies that he should be found fighting with the Egyptians
against Rome; and the vote was well understood to include him. Cæsar was
appointed to proclaim the war with all the _Fetial_ ceremonies, and the
Senate assumed the _sagum_.[208]

Both sides were now making preparations in earnest. Cæsar could draw
forces from Italy, Gaul, Spain, Illyricum, Sardinia, Sicily, and other
islands. Antony relied on Asia, the parts about Thrace, Greece and
Macedonia, Egypt, Cyrene, and the islands of the Ægean, besides a large
number of client kings who had owed their position to him.[209] He
silenced their scruples, when gathered at Samos, by pointing out that
they would not be formally at war with Rome, and promising that within
two months of the victory he would lay down his imperium and remit all
power to the Senate and people. Nor did he confine his exertions to
the East. Agents were sent to cities in Italy carrying money, though
Cæsar—who kept himself well informed—frustrated this attempt for the most
part.

[Sidenote: Antony approaches Italy.]

From Samos Antony removed his headquarters to Athens, whence in the
winter of B.C. 32 he started to invade Italy. But at Corcyra he
got intelligence of an advanced squadron of Cæsar’s fleet near the
Acroceraunian promontory, and thinking that Cæsar was there in full
force, he decided to put off hostilities till the spring, by which time
he expected to be joined by the forces of the client kings. He himself
wintered at Patræ, distributing his forces so as to guard various points
in Greece. He scornfully rejected Cæsar’s proposal for an interview, on
the ground that there was no one to decide between them, if either broke
the terms upon which they might agree. The proposal was probably not
seriously meant. It was only another means of putting Antony in the wrong.

[Sidenote: B.C. 31, Con., C. Octavius Cæsar, Val. Messala. The beginning
of hostilities.]

Nothing, however, was done before the end of the year, a storm having
frustrated an attempt of Cæsar’s to surprise some of the enemy’s ships
at Corcyra. In the early spring the first move was made by Agrippa,
who swooped down upon Methone in Messenia, killed Bogovas, late king
of Mauretania, and harassed the shores of Greece by other descents, in
order to divert Antony’s attention; who was now with his main fleet in
the Ambracian gulf, having secured the narrow entrance to it by towers
on either side, and with ships stationed between. His camp was close to
the temple of Apollo, on the south side of the strait. The successes of
Agrippa encouraged Cæsar to move. He landed troops in Ceraunia, making
his own headquarters at the “Sweet Haven,” at the mouth of the Cocytus,
and sent a detachment by land round the Ambracian sea to threaten
Antony’s camp. Having failed to entice the fleet from the Ambracian
gulf, or to tempt the men to abandon Antony, he seized the high ground
overlooking the strait, and opposite Actium, where he entrenched himself,
on the ground on which he afterwards built Nicopolis. The summer months,
however, were wearing away without any decisive blow being struck by
either side, and the delay was irksome to both. Rome was in a state of
simmering revolt owing to distress and heavy taxes, a discontent which
found expression in the conspiracy of Lepidus, son of the ex-triumvir.
It was promptly suppressed, indeed, and Lepidus was sent over to Cæsar
to receive his condemnation; but, nevertheless, Mæcenas, who was in
charge of Rome, found that he had no sinecure. To Antony, again, delay
meant discontent among his Eastern followers, tottering loyalty, and
probable abandonment. Above all, Cleopatra was in a highly nervous state,
and was urging a return to Egypt. At last on the 31st of August, a
cavalry engagement going against Antony, she became clamorous; and after
long deliberation, Antony determined to follow her advice. He ordered
his ships to be prepared for battle, but with the secret intention of
avoiding a fight and sailing away to Alexandria.[210]

[Sidenote: Battle of Actium, Sept. 3, B.C. 31.]

Cæsar was kept informed of this, and resolved to prevent it. His idea
was to allow the Antonian fleet to issue out and begin their course,
and then to fall upon their rear. But Agrippa thought that the superior
sailing powers of the Antonian fleet would render this impossible, and
urged an attack as soon as the ships cleared the straits. There had
been rough weather for four days, but on the 3rd of September there was
a calm,[211] or only some surf from the preceding storms; and when the
trumpet rang out for the start Antony’s huge vessels, furnished with
towers and filled with armed men, began streaming out of the straits.
They did not at first show any signs of standing out to sea. The ships
took up a close order and waited to be attacked. There was a brief pause
on Cæsar’s side. He or Agrippa hesitated to attack these great galleons
with their smaller craft. But before long an order was issued to the
vessels on the extremities of Cæsar’s fleet to exert their utmost powers
