in rowing in order to get round Antony’s two wings. To avoid this danger
Antony was forced against his will to order an attack.

The battle raged all the afternoon without decisive result; though the
smallness of Cæsar’s vessels proved in many points a decided advantage.
They could be rowed close up to bigger ships and be rowed away again
when a shower of javelins had been poured in upon the enemy. Antony’s
men returned the volleys and used grappling irons of great weight. If
these irons caught one of the smaller ships they were doubtless very
effective; but if the cast missed they either seriously damaged their own
ship, or caused so much confusion and delay that an opportunity was given
to the enemy to pour in fresh volleys of darts. At length Cleopatra,
whose ships were on the southern fringe of the fleet, could bear the
suspense no longer. She gave the signal for retreat, and a favourable
breeze springing up, the Egyptian ships were soon fading out of sight.
Antony thinking that this was the result of a panic, and that the day
was lost, hastened after the retiring squadron. The example of their
leader was followed by many of the crews, who lightening their ships by
throwing overboard the wooden towers and war tackle, fled with sails full
spread. But others still maintained the struggle, and it was not until
Cæsar’s men began throwing lighted brands upon the enemy’s ships that the
rout became general. Even then the work was not over, for Cæsar spent
the whole night on board endeavouring to rescue men from the burning
ships.[212]

[Sidenote: The finale of the civil war in Egypt, B.C. 31-30.]

Antony got clear off from pursuit, but his camp on land was easily taken,
and his army was intercepted while trying to retreat into Macedonia. For
the most part the men took service in Cæsar’s legions, the veterans being
disbanded without pensions. Antony, however, was followed to Egypt by
many of his adherents of rank, and still thought himself strong enough
to make terms with Cæsar. But he could no longer hope for aid from the
client kings. They all hastened to make their peace with Cæsar, or were
captured and punished. Even Cleopatra was secretly prepared to betray him.

With the exception of one visit to Brundisium of seven days, to suppress
the mutiny of some discontented veterans, Cæsar spent the winter at
Samos and Athens, collecting an army and navy destined to deprive Egypt
permanently of its independence. Cleopatra had indeed tried to brave it
out. She returned to Alexandria with her prows decked with flowers and
her pipers playing a triumphant tune. The people are not likely to have
been deceived, but there was no sign of revolt. She was able to seize
the property of those whose fidelity she suspected, and even put to
death the captive king of Armenia to gratify her ally the king of Media.
Messages were sent to the kings who had been allied with Antony, and for
some gladiators whom he had in training at Trapezus. The gladiators
started but were intercepted, and no help came from the client kings.
A still worse disappointment awaited him in Cyrene, over which he had
placed L. Pinarius Scarpus with four legions. When, leaving Cleopatra
at Parætonium, he went to take over these legions, Pinarius refused to
receive him and even put his messengers to death, and shortly afterwards
handed over his province and army to Cæsar’s legate, Cornelius Gallus.
This was an unmistakable sign that Antony’s day of influence was over.
Cleopatra returned to Alexandria and made secret preparations for
retiring into Asia, as far as Iberia (_Georgia_) if necessary, though
still keeping up appearances and sending in every direction for aid.
Cleopatra’s son Cæsarion and Antony’s son by Fulvia (Antyllus) were
declared of man’s estate and capable of governing, and messages were
despatched to Cæsar proposing that Antony should retire to Athens as a
_privatus_, and that Cleopatra should abdicate in favour of Cæsarion.
The queen also, without Antony’s knowledge, sent Cæsar a gold sceptre
and crown. He made no reply to Antony, but answered in threatening terms
to Cleopatra, while sending his freedman Thyrsus to give her privately a
reassuring message. Antony suspected the purport of Thyrsus’s mission,
and with a last ebullition of his old swaggering humour had him flogged,
and sent back with the message, that if Cæsar felt aggrieved he might
put his freedman Hipparchus (who had joined Cæsar) to the torture in
revenge. But things went from bad to worse with him. News came that
the gladiators had been impounded, that his own legatus in Syria (Q.
Didius) had bidden the Arabs burn the ships which he had prepared for his
flight in the Red Sea, and that the only two client kings who had seemed
inclined to stand by him—those of Cilicia and Galatia—had fallen off. He
therefore tried once more to open communications with Cæsar. He sent him
as a prisoner one of the assassins of Iulius, whom he had protected and
employed, P. Turullius, and a considerable sum of money by the hands
of his son Antyllus. Cæsar put Turullius to death and took the money,
but returned no answer to Antony, though he again sent a private message
to Cleopatra. Presently Antony was informed that Gallus had arrived at
Parætonium with the four legions taken over from Pinarius; and believing
that even now his personal influence was sufficient to win back the men,
he hurried thither, accompanied by the remains of his fleet coasting
along to guard him. But this only led to farther disaster. The soldiers
refused to listen to him; and when his ships entered the harbour the
chains were made fast across the mouth and they were trapped. On land he
now found himself between two hostile forces; for Cæsar with Cleopatra’s
connivance had landed at Pelusium and was marching on Alexandria, and
Gallus was attacking him from Parætonium. He once more executed one
of those rapid movements for which he was famous. Hastening back to
Alexandria he flung his cavalry upon Cæsar’s vanguard when tired with its
march. But the success of this movement encouraged him to make a general
attack, in which he was decisively beaten. His last resource, the ships
still remaining in the harbour of Alexandria, failed him. Acting under
Cleopatra’s orders the captains refused to receive him. The queen, it is
said, had shut herself up in the Tomb-house or Ptolemæum, hoping to drive
Antony to despair and suicide, as the only solution of the difficulty. If
that was indeed her motive, she was both successful and repentant. Antony
stabbed himself, and begged to be carried to the Tomb-house, where he
died in her arms.

[Sidenote: Death of Cleopatra.]

Cæsar was now eager to secure Cleopatra’s person. He sent Gallus to her
with soothing messages, which he delivered to her at the porch. But while
he was speaking with her C. Proculeius entered by a window, seized the
queen, and conveyed her to the Palace, where she was allowed her usual
attendants and all the paraphernalia of royalty. Of the two accounts of
Cæsar’s interview with her the more picturesque one is given by the
usually prosaic Dio. He found her looking charming in her mourning,
surrounded by likenesses of various kinds of the great Iulius, and in
the bosom of her dress a packet of letters received from him. On his
entrance she rose with a blush and greeted him as her lord and master.
She pleaded that Iulius had always honoured her and acknowledged her as
queen. She read affectionate passages from his letters, which she kissed
passionately with tears streaming from her eyes, being at the same time
careful to put respectful admiration and affection for Cæsar himself into
her looks and the tone of her voice. Cæsar quite appreciated the drama
thus played for his behoof, but feigned unconsciousness, keeping his
eyes fixed on the ground and saying nothing but: “Courage, madam! Do not
be alarmed, for no harm will happen to you.” He said no word, however,
as to her retention of royal power, nor did his voice betray the least
tenderness. In an agony of disappointment she flung herself at his feet
and besought him by the memory of his father to allow her to die and
share Antony’s tomb. Cæsar made no reply except once more to bid her not
be alarmed; but he gave orders that though allowed her usual attendants
she was to be closely watched. Cleopatra understood only too well that
the intention was to take her to Rome that she might adorn the victor’s
triumph. But in order to secure greater freedom she feigned submission
and to be busied in collecting presents to take to Livia. Having thus
diminished the vigilance of Epaphroditus and her other guards, she some
days afterwards made a parade of writing a letter to Cæsar, which she
induced Epaphroditus to convey. When he returned, however, he found
the queen, decked in royal robes, lying dead with two of her waiting
women dead or dying by her side. “No one knows for certain,” says Dio,
“how she died. Some say that a venomous snake was conveyed to her in a
water-vessel or in some flowers. Others that the long pin with which
she fastened her hair had a poisoned point, with which she pricked her
arm.” Plutarch, with a like expression of doubt, says that the snake was
conveyed in a basket of figs; and that on receiving the letter brought
by Epaphroditus Cæsar understood her purpose and hurried to the Palace
to prevent it, and even summoned some of the mysterious Psylli—snake
charmers and curers—to suck out the poison.[213] But in spite of his
disappointment, he admired her spirit and gave her a royal funeral.
Perhaps after all he felt relieved of a difficulty. According to Plutarch
she had shown him that she was not to be easily managed. At the end of
her conversation with Cæsar, he says, she handed him a schedule of the
royal treasures. But when one of her stewards or treasurers remarked
that she was keeping back certain sums, the enraged queen sprang up,
clutched his hair, and beat his face with her fists. When Cæsar smiled
and tried to pacify her, she exclaimed: “A pretty thing, Cæsar, that you
should visit and address me with honour in my fallen state, and that one
of my own slaves should malign me! If I have set apart certain women’s
ornaments, it was not for myself, but for Octavia and Livia, that they
might soften your heart to me.”

It would be pleasanter if the death of Cleopatra and the confiscation of
her treasury were the end of the story. But the executions of the two
poor boys, Cæsarion and Antyllus, were acts of cold-blooded cruelty.
The former, who could not have been more than sixteen, had been sent by
his mother with a large supply of money to Æthiopia, but was betrayed
by his _pædagogus_, overtaken by Cæsar’s soldiers, and put to death.
The young Antonius (or Antyllus) begged hard for his life, and fled for
safety to the _heroum_ of the divine Iulius, constructed by Cleopatra,
but was dragged away and killed. He could at most have been no more
than fourteen, and had in childhood been betrothed to Cæsar’s infant
daughter, Iulia. Perhaps the pretensions of Cæsarion to the paternity of
Cæsar, and his acknowledgment as heir to the throne of Egypt, made his
death inevitable; but the extreme youth of Antyllus and his helplessness
might have pleaded for him. The rest of Antony’s children were protected
by Octavia, and brought up as became their rank.

It is impossible not to feel some sympathy for Antony, who had thus flung
away fame and life for a woman’s love. But it was doubtless a happy thing
for the world that the direction of affairs fell to the cautious Augustus
rather than to him. He had some attractive qualities, but no virtues.
Boundless self-indulgence in a ruler more than outweighs good-nature or
liberality. It brings more suffering to subjects than the occasional
gratification caused by the latter qualities can compensate. His scheme
for erecting a series of semi-independent kingdoms in the East would
almost certainly have been the cause of endless troubles. He was not more
than fifty-three at his death, but there were signs of a great decay of
energy and activity. The people thought of him—

    “As of a Prince whose manhood was all gone,
    And molten down in mere uxoriousness.”

And undoubtedly, if instead of spending a winter in Samos in luxury and
riot and part of another at Athens in much the same way, he had begun his
attack on Cæsar a year earlier, the result might have been different. But
he let the occasion slip and found, as others have done, that the head of
Time is bald at the back.

[Illustration: Obv.: Head of Augustus. Rev.: The Sphinx.

Obv.: Heads of Augustus and Agrippa. Rev.: Crocodile and Palm. _Colonia
Nemausi_ (Nismes).

Obv.: Head of Augustus. Rev.: Triumphal Arch, celebrating the
reconstruction of the roads.

Obv.: Head of Drusus. Rev.: The Trophy of Arms taken from the Germans.

Obv.: Head of Livia. Rev.: Head of Julia.

_To face page 130._]




CHAPTER VIII

THE NEW CONSTITUTION, B.C. 30-23

    _Hic ames dici pater atque princeps._


[Sidenote: The new constitution.]

The seven years which followed the death of Antony and Cleopatra
witnessed the settlement of the new constitution in its most important
points. It has been called a _dyarchy_, the two parties to it being the
Emperor and the Senate. They were not, however, at any time of equal
power. As far as it was possible Augustus rested his various functions on
the same foundation as those of the Republican magistrates, and treated
the Senate with studious respect. But in spite of all professions,
in spite even of himself, he became a monarch, whose will was only
limited by those forces of circumstance and sentiment to which the most
autocratic of sovereigns have at times been forced to bow. The important
epochs in this reconstruction are the years B.C. 29, 27, 23; but it will
be necessary sometimes to anticipate the course of events and to speak at
once of what often took many years to develop.

[Sidenote: Reduction of the army.]

The reduction of the vast armaments which the various phases of the civil
war had called into existence was made possible by the wealth which the
possession of Egypt put into Cæsar’s hands. Though Egypt became a Roman
province it was from the first in a peculiar position, governed by a
“prefect” appointed by the Emperor, who took as his private property
both the treasures and domain lands of the Ptolemaic kings and the
balance of the revenues over the expenses. This formed the nucleus of
what was afterwards called the _fiscus_,[214] the imperial revenue as
distinguished from the _ærarium_ or public treasury. He was thus enabled
to disband many legions at once, without the dangerous discontent of the
veterans, or the irritation of fresh confiscations. It was imperatively
necessary to do this if he wished to avoid the dangers which had so often
threatened the State from leaders of overgrown military forces. The
number of legions under arms during the preceding ten years was indeed
formidable. In B.C. 36, when Cæsar took over those of Lepidus and Sextus
Pompeius, he had forty-four or forty-five legions under his command.[215]
Between that time and the war with Antony he had reduced the number to
eighteen. But after the victory at Actium and the death of Antony, the
legions taken over from him, along with those newly raised for the war,
again amounted to fifty. Therefore Cæsar had twice to deal with a body of
about 250,000 men. He says himself that in the course of his wars half a
million citizens had taken the military oath to him. The wealth of Egypt
served to purchase lands or compensate towns for such as were taken for
the veterans. From first to last more than 300,000 men were provided for
in this way.[216] An important purpose also served by this measure was
the repeopling of Italy and the renovation of many towns which during
the civil wars, or from other causes, had fallen into decay. Republican
precedent was followed by recalling the ancient practice of settling
“colonies” in the Italian towns, but with this difference, that the new
colonists were usually treated as a _supplementum_ of an already existing
colonia, lands being purchased for them from private owners or from the
communities. Augustus claims twenty-eight of such Italian colonies, of
which thirteen are known to have been in past times “Roman” or “Latin”
colonies. Other towns, besides a money compensation, were rewarded by
being raised to the status of a colony, generally with the addition of
“Iulia” or “Augusta” to their name. This system was presently extended
beyond Italy—to Africa, Spain, Sicily, Illyricum, Macedonia, Achaia,
Gallia Narbonensis, Asia, Syria, and Pisidia. Settlements in these
countries were all colonies of veterans, except Dyrrachium, which was
filled with dispossessed Italians. This was not altogether a novelty:
for extra-Italian colonies had been already established in Cisalpine and
Transalpine Gaul, at Carthage, and at Corinth. Iulius Cæsar is said to
have settled 80,000 citizens in this way outside Italy. The extra-Italic
colonies of Augustus, however, differed from these last in regard to
status. They had what was called _Latinitas_, that is, citizenship
without the right of voting or holding office at Rome. In virtue of this
citizenship they came under the Roman law and belonged to the assize
(_conventus_) of the provincial governors. Some of them, again, had the
special privileges which were summed up in the general term “Italic
right” (_ius Italicum_), and included freedom from the jurisdiction
of the provincial governor (_libertas_), and exemption from tribute
(_immunitas_). The general aim seems to have been to put the extra-Italic
colonies as far as possible in the same position as those in Italy. As
a rule also the veterans settled in a colony had been enlisted in the
province, and had, therefore, already local connections. Augustus took
trouble in fostering and adorning these towns, whether in Italy or the
provinces, and records with pride that many had become populous cities
during his lifetime. In many cases their subsequent importance shewed
that they had been well selected. Thus Carthage had a great mediæval
history; Durazzo and Philippi were long places of consequence; Saragossa,
Merida, Cordova, Aix, Patras, Beyroot, all trace their prosperity to the
colonisation of Augustus.[217]

[Sidenote: Improvements at Rome.]

Nor did he meanwhile forget to encourage restoration at Rome, to which
