he had already given a strong impulse. Nothing had damaged Antony in the
eyes of the Romans more than the report of his intention to transfer the
seat of Empire to Alexandria. A similar report as to the establishment
of an imperial city for the East at Ilium caused a like uneasiness a few
years later, which found expression in one of Horace’s most spirited
odes.[218] Cæsar prudently shewed not only that he held firmly by the
Imperial position of Rome, but that he also wished to make it externally
worthy to be the capital of the world. As in all his projects, no one
co-operated more loyally than Agrippa. But others also were pressed
into the service; and those especially who had earned triumphs were
encouraged to use a portion at least of their spoils in public works. In
the next few years there was a great outburst of temple restoration,[219]
and it became the fashion among the immediate friends and followers of
Augustus to signalise their tenure of office or a military success by
undertaking some important building. Horace again has reflected the view
of such matters which the official classes were expected to take, and
perhaps to a certain extent did take. The sufferings of the Romans in the
revolutionary period had undoubtedly been great. The ruinous state of the
temples was doubtless connected with the unsettled times—whether as cause
or consequence, who could exactly say? It was not unnatural to suppose
that among the other _delicta maiorum_ this too had moved the wrath of
the gods. At any rate moral laxity went side by side with scepticism
and neglect of religious observances. Nor need we regard either poet or
emperor as a monster of hypocrisy in supporting such a doctrine. Habit
and tradition are stronger than philosophy. There always remains the
Incalculable after all our reasoning; and many to-day regret the decay
of religious sentiment as a public misfortune, who are yet profoundly
uncertain as to what they in truth believe themselves.

[Sidenote: Honours bestowed on Cæsar, B.C. 30-27.]

On his return from Asia and Greece, where he had spent the winter and
spring of B.C. 30-29, Cæsar was received with enthusiasm by all classes.
Solemn sacrifice was offered by the consul in the name of the people, and
every honour which the Senate could bestow was awaiting his acceptance.
Those voted after Actium were lavishly increased in September B.C.
30, on the news of Antony’s death and the occupation of Alexandria.
Two triumphal arches were to be erected, one at Rome and another at
Brundisium;[220] the temple of the divine Iulius was to be adorned with
the prows of captured ships; his own birthday, the day of the victory at
Actium, and that of the entry into Alexandria were to be for ever sacred;
the Vestal Virgins and the whole people were to meet him on his return in
solemn procession; he was to have the foremost seat at all festivals; and
was to celebrate three triumphs—one for the victory over the Dalmatian
and neighbouring tribes, a second for Actium, and a third for Egypt.
The _tribunicia potestas_ for life had again been voted to him with
the right of exercising it within a mile radius beyond the walls. He
was to have the right to hear all cases on appeal and to have a casting
vote in all courts. His name was to be mentioned in public prayers for
the state. On the 1st of January, B.C. 29, all his _acta_ had been
confirmed; and when it became known that the Parthians had referred a
disputed succession to the throne to his arbitration, some fresh honours
were devised. The disasters under Crassus and Antony had made the Romans
particularly sensitive in regard to the Parthians; and this apparent
acknowledgment by them of a superiority attaching to Augustus, however
indefinite, was represented by the court party and the court poets, not
only as a veritable triumph over the Parthians, but as a step in a career
of Eastern conquest of almost unlimited extent.[221] Accordingly his
name was now to be coupled with those of the gods in hymns; a tribe was
named _Iulia_ in his honour; he was to wear the chaplet of victory in
all assemblies; and to nominate as many members as he chose to all the
sacred colleges. Cæsar accepted most of these honours, but begged to be
excused the procession on his return. This was an honour which he always
avoided if he could, preferring to enter the city quietly by night. It
was no doubt a trying ordeal at the end of a long journey, and he may
have felt like Cromwell that a larger crowd still would have come out to
see him hanged. The three triumphs, however, were now celebrated with the
greatest splendour, especially the third over Egypt, in which a figure of
the dead queen lying upon a couch, with son and daughter beside her, was
a prominent feature.

[Sidenote: The increase of the Patriciate and the Census.]

Cæsar now had ample powers for every purpose of government. The
_tribunicia potestas_ in itself gave him legislative initiative and
control over other departments. It was afterwards regarded as the most
important of his powers. But in his first measures of reform he availed
himself rather of his powers as consul. The consulship was to be really,
as it always remained nominally, the chief state office, combining all
the prerogatives once centred in the _rex_. Thus in holding the Census of
B.C. 28 he acted as Consul with his colleague Agrippa, exercising indeed
a _censoria potestas_, though not one formally bestowed, but as inherent
in the consulship.[222] He concluded it with the solemn _lustrum_, which
had not been performed for forty-two years, the last Censors (B.C. 50)
having apparently been prevented from performing this solemnity by the
outbreak of civil war. The Census was made the occasion of a reform
in the _ordines_ and especially of the Senate. In the first place, he
recruited the dwindling number of patrician _gentes_ by raising certain
plebeian families to the patriciate, as his own family had been raised
by Iulius in B.C. 45 in virtue of a _lex Cassia_. The same power was now
accorded to him by a law proposed by L. Sænius, who was consul during the
last two months of B.C. 30. The object seems to have been to preserve a
kind of nobility, which at the same time should have certain political
disabilities. The patricians, indeed, still had the exclusive right of
being appointed to certain religious offices, but, on the other hand,
they were debarred from the tribuneship and the plebeian ædileship,[223]
the two offices in which a man by legislative proposals or lavish
expenditure might make himself politically conspicuous.

[Sidenote: The lectiones Senatus.]

A similar desire to restore the ancient order of the State prompted his
reformation of the Senate. The powers of this body had always been great
precisely because they were not defined by law; and by associating it
with himself he would gain all the advantages of this indefiniteness and
prestige, while really keeping full control of it. Iulius Cæsar had made
the mistake of treating it with studied disrespect, and his chief enemies
were within its walls. The Triumvirs, though in reality despotic, had
looked to it to give their _acta_ an outward show of legality. Thus on
Octavian’s demand it had condemned Q. Gallius in B.C. 43, and Salvidienus
in B.C. 40, for treason. It had confirmed the triumviral _acta_ en bloc,
giving Antony charge of the Parthian war and ratifying his arrangements
in the East in advance. It had voted triumphs and other honours to the
triumvirs and their agents. It was the Senate that in B.C. 41 voted L.
Antonius an _hostis_, that in B.C. 32 decreed war against Cleopatra,
deposed Antony from consulship and imperium, and in B.C. 31-30 voted the
various honours and powers to the victorious Cæsar. The late civil war
had in a way made the importance of the Senate more prominent. So many
Senators had joined Antony at Alexandria that, like Sertorius in Spain
and Pompey in Epirus, he had professed to have the Senate with him.
The victory of Actium had pricked that bubble, and the Senate at Rome
remained the only Senate of the Empire. Cæsar was wise to put himself
under the ægis of this ancient and still respected body. But it was
necessary to secure its dignity and effectiveness, which had suffered
in various ways during the revolutionary period. Among other things its
numbers had been swollen and often with men of inferior social standing.
Iulius Cesar had filled it with his creatures—provincials from Gaul
and Spain, sons of freedmen, centurions, soldiers, and peregrini—so
that a pasquinade was put up by some wit that “no one was to show a new
Senator the way to the Senate House.”[224] Another batch of Senators was
introduced after Cæsar’s death, chiefly by Antony, in virtue of real or
fictitious entries found in Cæsar’s papers, whom the populace nicknamed
“post-mortem Senators” (_Senatores orcini_),[225] or sometimes even
on their own initiative without any other formality than assuming the
laticlave and senatorial shoe.[226] Many Senators no doubt perished in
the proscriptions, in the subsequent battles of Philippi and Perusia, and
in the contests with Sextus Pompeius, but the Triumvirs appear to have
been lavish in enrolling new members without regard to fortune, origin,
or official position; and so careless were they in this matter that cases
are recorded of unenfranchised slaves having obtained office and seats in
the Senate and being then recognised and claimed by their masters.[227]
The result was that at the time of the battle of Actium there were more
than a thousand Senators.[228] This was too large a number for practical
work, without taking into consideration inferiority of character. No
doubt a good many who had sided with Antony disappeared in various ways;
but in now making a formal _lectio_ Cæsar resolved to reduce the number
still more. Sixty voluntarily resigned and were allowed to retain the
purple and certain social distinctions, but a hundred and forty were
simply omitted from the new list. By this means the roll was reduced
to about six hundred, which continued to be the number in subsequent
lectiones.

To secure their attendance and to prevent interference in the provinces
the regulation was enforced which prohibited any Senator from leaving
Italy (except for Sicily or Gallia Narbonensis) unless he had imperium
or was on a legatio,[229] that is, practically, unless he was serving
the state in some way on Cæsar’s nomination. In the next _lectio_ (B.C.
19) Augustus tried an elaborate system of co-option, by nominating
thirty on the existing roll, each of whom were to name five who were
to draw lots for admission, and so on till the number was made up.
But finding that it was not worked fairly he stopped this and made up
the roll himself. This continued to be the system, but as time went on
the difficulty was not so much to exclude unworthy men as to induce
enough of the right sort to serve. Membership became less attractive
as the imperial power developed, and the holding of profitable offices
depended on the will of the Emperor, who was not bound to select from
the Senate. Moreover, a property qualification was now required. None
had existed under the republic by definite law, though a certain
fortune was regarded as practically necessary; and as the Senate was
recruited from the _ordo equester_, a minimum was in the last century
of the republic automatically secured. Cæsar fixed 800,000 sesterces,
and later on a million sesterces as the Senatorial fortune, though in
cases of special fitness he gave grants to enable men to maintain their
position. Still the honour of membership was not found to make up for
its disabilities—the difficulty of going abroad and the prohibition as
to engaging in commerce. In B.C. 13 Augustus was obliged to compel men
who had the property qualification to serve. Even then the attendance
was so slack that in B.C. 11 the old quorum of four hundred was reduced.
In B.C. 9 various regulations were introduced to facilitate business,
such as the publication of an order of the day (λεύκωμα), fixed days
of meeting, a variation as to the quorum required for different kinds
of business, a scale of fines for non-attendance, the selection by lot
of thirty-five Senators to attend during September and October, and an
extension to the prætors of the power of bringing business before the
house. Towards the end of the life of Augustus, when his age made it
too much of an exertion to meet the full Senate, a committee of sixteen
Senators was selected by lot to confer with him at his own house. The
inevitable consequence was that this small committee practically settled
most questions, which only came formally before the whole body, whose
administrative function was farther lessened by the diminished importance
of the _ærarium_ as compared with the imperial treasury or _fiscus_.
Finally, it lost the right of coining silver, retaining only the bronze.
On the whole, then, the tendency was towards restricting the functions
of the Senate and making membership less attractive. But this does not
appear to have been the original design of Augustus. He habitually
addressed it with respect, referred all his powers to its confirmation,
and took it into his confidence on imperial affairs. He revived the
ancient dignity of _princeps Senatus_—in abeyance since the death of
Cicero—and held that rank himself all his life. Certain of the provinces
were still left to its management, and cases of _majestas_ were referred
to its decision. The publication of the Senate’s _acta_ had originated
with Iulius Cæsar (B.C. 59), who was not likely to have done anything to
enhance its prestige. The prohibition of this publication by Augustus
was perhaps intended partly to protect the proceedings from criticism,
partly to emphasise the fact that the Senate shared with him the intimate
secrets of government which it was not for the public advantage to have
generally known. The effect, however, was not good; what could not be
ascertained with exactness from official sources was often misrepresented
by irresponsible rumour, and one of the early measures of Tiberius was to
reverse this order.[230]

[Sidenote: The end of the anarchy.]

With a Senate purified by his first _lectio_ Cæsar felt that the
constitution might in form, at any rate, be restored. But first the
end of the revolutionary period had to be marked. On January 11, B.C.
29, the temple of Ianus was closed, for the first time since B.C. 235,
for the third time in all Roman history. It was still shut when Cæsar
returned from Asia, and on the 1st of January, B.C. 28, the _augurium
salutis_ was taken. This ceremony—ascertaining by augury whether prayers
for the people should be offered to Salus—could only be performed in
time of complete peace. At the same time a single edict annulled all
the _acta_ of the triumvirs, which were to have no force from his sixth
consulship (B.C. 28).[231] The constitutional significance of this will
be best seen by recalling some facts as to the triumvirs. Whether its
_acta_ were good or bad, the triumvirate was in itself a suspension of
the constitution. Established by a _lex_ on the 27th of November, B.C.
43, to hold office till the 31st of December, B.C. 38, its authority
had been renewed in the course of B.C. 37 to the 31st of December, B.C.
33, whether by another _lex_ or by the will of the triumvirs themselves
is a moot point.[232] But, however appointed, the triumvirs were like
dictators in superseding all other magistrates, and more powerful
than dictators from the length of their tenure of office, and because
the terms of their appointment (_reipublicæ constituendæ causa_) gave
them absolute legislative powers. They could abolish, modify, or grant
dispensation from existing laws. Their edicts had the force of laws, and
such laws as were passed in the regular way during their office either
confirmed their powers, or were passed at their desire to give formal
permanence to their edicts. They had complete control of elections, and
agreed between themselves as to the nomination of magistrates, often
for several years in advance. They controlled the treasury, the domain
lands, the raising or removal of taxation in Rome and Italy. They divided
among themselves the command of the military forces and the government
of the provinces. Each of them, personally or by a legatus, exercised
imperial powers in the provinces assigned to him; set up or put down
client kings; granted immunities or freedom to cities, or abolished
them; bestowed or withdrew the citizenship of individuals; waged war
with surrounding nations; raised or remitted taxation. At Rome also they
had exercised the right of summoning, consulting, and presiding over
the Senate, of vetoing the motion of other Senators, but without being
subject to the tribunician veto themselves. To abolish the _acta_ of
such a despotic body might with reason be regarded a considerable step
towards a restoration of the constitution. Even if some of his own _acta_
were thereby abolished, Cæsar would have no difficulty in re-enacting
them if desirable. The point was to abolish the memory of a period of
unconstitutional government, to prevent its enactments remaining as
precedents or grounds of claim by citizen or subject, and to leave the
field open for the new arrangement which Cæsar wished men to regard as
a restoration of the republic. For he had already conceived a plan, in
virtue of which the people, magistrates, and Senate should resume their
old functions, while he himself should be practically the colleague of
the higher magistrates—endowed with their powers, though not necessarily
with their office—and thereby practically direct the policy of the state.
The key to the policy—as he wished it to be regarded—is contained in
his own comment: “After that time (January 1, 27) I was superior to all
in rank, but of power I had no more than my colleagues in the several
offices.”[233] There were some of his powers difficult to reconcile with
this theory of a restored constitution; but he was careful to rest these
on votes of the people or Senate, to accept them only for fixed periods,
or to profess to share them with his colleagues.[234]

[Sidenote: Inauguration of the new constitution, 1 January, B.C. 27.]

The new constitution was now introduced in a characteristic scene,
apparently designed to make it clear that Cæsar did not seek power,
but undertook it under pressure. In a meeting of the Senate, at the
beginning of his seventh consulship, he delivered from a written copy
a carefully prepared speech, in which he surrendered to the Senate
all the powers which it had bestowed upon him, as well as those which
he had acquired in any other way—the command of troops, the powers of
legislation, the government of the provinces. He based his resolution
on justice, the inherent right of the people to manage its own affairs,
and on his own right to consult for his personal safety, health, and
ease. At the same time, he dwelt on his public services and those of his
adoptive father, the labours they had both endured, the dangers to which
both had been exposed, and justified the exercise up to this time of his
various powers. Finally, he urged them to refrain from innovations, to
give a hearty obedience to the laws, to elect the best men for civil and
military offices without prejudice or favouritism, to deal honestly with
public money, to treat allies and subjects equitably, to seek no wars but
to be prepared for any, and to see that he had no cause to regret his
renunciation of power. The speech was received with loud remonstrances,
some sincere and some perhaps cautious and time-serving, but so general
that he had to consent with real or feigned reluctance to receive back
his autocratic powers. Was he merely playing a part, or had he any real
wish to retire from public life? As in most cases there was probably a
division of feeling in his heart. He was in weak health, and had had
another illness a few months before. For eighteen years—just half his
life—he had been ceaselessly engaged in fatiguing duties, in wars for
which he had no genius, and in civil administration which, though much
