better suited to his taste and abilities, had been carried out amidst
constant opposition and difficulty. One side of his mind may well have
been eager for rest. But, on the other hand, no man who has tasted power
and feels that he can wield it quits it without pain. At no time did
he find pleasure in the outward trappings of state, or in the personal
indulgences for which it gives opportunity, but he was ambitious in the
best sense. He loved his country and desired to be remembered as the
restorer of its prosperity and happiness, as the benefactor of the Empire
and the guarantee of its peace and good government. Twenty-four years
later when Valerius Messalla, speaking in the name of people and Senate,
greeted him with the affectionate title of “Father of his country,” he
burst into tears and could only murmur that he had nothing more to pray
for except to retain their affection to the end of his life. But whatever
secret wish he may have had for rest he must have known that it was
impossible. The elements of disorder and oppression were not destroyed.
If the restraining hand were removed they would break out into new
activity. Nor would it be safe for himself after years of steady working
for this end, in the course of which he must have offended countless
interests, to trust himself to a new generation of statesmen without the
experience in the working of a free state possessed by their ancestors,
and yet with the same passions and ambitions. A scheme had, in fact,
been elaborated in conjunction with his faithful friends and ministers,
Agrippa and Mæcenas. Dio represents the former as urging Cæsar to
withdraw from power and frankly to restore the republic. He grounded his
advice on the financial and political difficulties which he would have
to face, on the uncertainty of his own health, on the impossibility of
drawing back hereafter and the evil destiny of all those who in previous
ages had attempted to gain absolute power. Mæcenas, on the other hand,
not only urged him to retain his power, but went into most elaborate
details as to the arrangements which it would be necessary to make. He
did not deny the risks, but maintained that the glory was worth them,
and that a withdrawal was neither safe for himself nor for the people.
It is not clear how far we may regard these two speeches, as well as
that of Augustus in the Senate, as representing what was really said. It
is possible that as they were all written documents they may have been
preserved, and that Dio is translating from them; but at any rate they
represent fairly well the two sides of the question which Augustus must
have considered with care and anxiety.[235]

[Sidenote: Division of the Provinces, B.C. 27.]

The arrangement actually made was of the nature of a compromise. The
provinces were divided, as formerly between Antony and Cæsar, so now
between Cæsar and the Senate. Those that required considerable military
forces were to be under Cæsar, governed by his deputies with the rank
of prætor (_legati pro prætore_), appointed by his sole authority, and
holding office during his pleasure. The rest were to be still governed
by proconsuls, selected as of old by ballot under the superintendence of
the Senate from the ex-prætors or ex-consuls, subject to the existing
laws as to length of tenure and the obligation of furnishing accounts,
and liable with their staff to prosecution _de rebus repetundis_ in the
ordinary courts. The “primacy” of the Emperor, however, was apparent in
this partnership with the Senate, no less than in that with colleagues
in office. In the allotment of Senatorial provinces he retained the
right of nominating the exact number required, so that no one of whom
he disapproved could obtain a province. In both classes of province he
appointed a procurator, with authority over the finances independent
of the proconsul or legatus.[236] In both also the governor received a
salary fixed by himself, and had to conform to certain general principles
laid down by him. In all alike he possessed a _majus imperium_, soon
afterwards, if not at first, defined as a _proconsulare imperium_.[237]

For the rest he retained his right of being yearly elected consul, his
tribunician power, his membership of the sacred colleges, his command of
the army. But freedom of election was ostensibly restored to the people,
and the Senate was still the fountain of honour, and had the control
of the _ærarium_. But this last was no longer managed by two elected
quæstors, but by two men of prætorian rank, nominated by the Emperor.
It was, moreover, now of minor importance, as the _fiscus_ (to use the
later term) was entirely in the hands of Cæsar, and into it went the
revenues of the imperial provinces, and, above all, of Egypt. The key
of the position was that though the old republican magistrates still
existed, Cæsar in various ways was their colleague, and of course the
predominant partner. The Senate, however, accepted his view of the case,
as afterwards expressed in the _Monumentum_, that he had “transferred
the republic from his power to the authority of the Senate and people
of Rome.” To show their confidence in him the Senators voted him a
bodyguard (the men drawing double pay), and confirmed his authority in
the provinces. The latter, which made him _princeps_ throughout the
Empire, as he already was in Rome, he refused to accept for more than
ten years. But it was always renewed subsequently for periods of five or
ten years; and when in B.C. 23, the _proconsulare imperium_ was declared
to be operative within, as well as beyond, the pomærium, he had, in fact,
supreme control, military and financial, in all parts of the Empire. To
mark his exceptional position without offending the prejudice against
royalty, it was desired to give him a special title of honour. His own
wish was for “Romulus,” as second founder of the state. But objection was
raised to it as recalling the odious position of _rex_, and he eventually
accepted the title of AUGUSTUS, a word connected with religion and the
science of augury, and thereby suggesting the kind of sentiment which
he desired to be attached to his person and genius. This was voted by
the Senate on the Ides (13th) of January, B.C. 27, and confirmed by a
plebiscitum on the 16th. He was now “first” or _princeps_ everywhere,
whether in the Senate, or among his colleagues in the offices, or among
the proconsuls in the provinces.[238] He was, therefore, spoken of as
_princeps_ in ordinary language, and the word gradually hardened into a
title. It exactly suited the view which he himself wished to be taken
of his political position, as giving a primacy of rank among colleagues
of equal _legal_ powers; though, of course, a primacy, supported by the
power of the purse and the sword, made him a master while masquerading
as a colleague. He, however, adopted the word as rightly expressing his
position without giving needless offence, and his successors took it as a
matter of course, though it less frequently occurs in inscriptions than
their other titles.[239]

Closely connected with the bestowal of the title Augustus was another
vote of the Senate, that the front of his house should not only be
adorned with the laurels that told of victory over his enemies, but also
with the oaken or “civic” crown which told of the lives of citizens
preserved. This appears again and again on his coins with the legend—_ob
cives servatos_: and it is mentioned by Augustus himself at the end of
his record of achievements, as though—with the later title of Pater
Patriæ—it indicated the chief glory of his career.




CHAPTER IX

THE FIRST PRINCIPATUS, B.C. 27-23

    _Serves iturum Cæsarem in ultimos_
    _orbis Britannos et invenum recens_
    _examen Eois timendum_
    _partibus Oceanoque rubro._


[Sidenote: Gaul and Britain.]

The settlement of his official status at Rome left Augustus free to turn
to other parts of the Empire. He had spent the greater part of two years
after the victory at Actium in organising the East. His face was now
turned northward and westward. In the spring of B.C. 27, he set out for
Gaul to reorganise the provinces won by Iulius in B.C. 58-49, and farther
secured by the operations of Agrippa in B.C. 37 and Messalla in B.C.
29. It was understood that he meant also to cross to Britain, and the
court poets are dutifully anxious as to the dangers he will incur, and
prophetically certain of the victories he will win. A British expedition
had been for some years floating in Roman minds. It is true that Iulius
Cæsar had invaded the island and imposed a tribute on some of the tribes.
But the tribute does not seem to have been paid. The Briton was still
_intactus_, and was classed with the Parthian as a danger to the frontier
of the Empire.[240] He was chiefly known at Rome by the presence of
certain stalwart slaves, and by the determination he displayed not to
admit adventurous Roman merchants.[241] But, after all, Augustus found
enough to do in Gaul, and saw good reason for abstaining from such a
dangerous adventure. The Britons, though they neglected the _tributum_,
yet paid a duty on exports and imports to and from Gaul, principally
ivory ornaments, and the better sorts of glass and pottery; and it was
pointed out that the danger of a British invasion of Gallia was small,
that a military occupation of the island would cost more than the tribute
would bring in, and that the _portoria_ would be rather diminished than
increased by it.[242] Augustus, at any rate, professed to be satisfied by
certain envoys sent to him from Britain. They dedicated some offerings on
the Capitol, and received for their countrymen the title of “Friends of
Rome!”[243]

[Sidenote: Augustus in Gaul, B.C. 27-6.]

Augustus spent the summer and winter of B.C. 27-6 in Narbo, finding
enough to do in holding a census of the rest of Gaul for purposes of
taxation, and regularly organising the country annexed by Iulius to
that ancient province, which had been Roman long before his time. Four
provinces were created with separate legati. The original “province” was
now called Gallia Narbonensis; the south-western district, extending
from the Pyrennees to the Loire, retained its old name of Aquitania;
the central or “Celtic” Gaul was called Lugdunensis, from its capital
Lugdunum, made a _colonia_ in B.C. 43; the northern country up to the
Rhine was Belgica, including the districts on the left bank of the Rhine,
in which Agrippa had settled certain German tribes who had crossed the
river. Augustus was not content with a merely political organisation.
He established schools to spread the use of the Latin language, and
everywhere introduced the principles of Roman law. He took especial
pains to adorn and promote the towns in Narbonensis, where traces of his
buildings are still to be seen. The effect of his work now and ten years
later was that Gaul became rapidly Romanised both in speech and manners,
and that in learning and civilisation it soon rivalled Italy itself.

This was a work thoroughly congenial to Augustus, and in which his
ability was conspicuous. But he now had to engage again in war, for which
his genius was by no means so well suited. Ianus Quirinus was again open.
The surrounding barbarians were again threatening Macedonia; the Salassi
of the _Val d’Aosta_ were again making raids, and there was imminent
danger in Northern Spain. The governor of Macedonia, M. Crassus (grandson
of the triumvir) had been so successful over the Thracians and Getæ, that
he was allowed a triumph in July, B.C. 27, but it appears that their
incursions did not cease in spite of these victories.[244] The war with
the Salassi was entrusted to Terentius Varro Muræna, who, after winning
some victories in the field, sold many thousands of their men of military
age into slavery, and established a colony of 3,000 veterans to overawe
them, called Augusta Prætoria, the modern Aosta.[245]

[Sidenote: Augustus in Spain, B.C. 26-25.]

[Sidenote: The Arabian Expedition.]

From Narbo, Augustus next proceeded to Spain in the early part of B.C.
26, and spent the rest of the year in peaceful reforms and in the
organisation of the province. But in B.C. 25 he was forced to enter
upon a campaign against the Cantabri and Astures, those warlike tribes
in the north-west, who, nominally included in the upper province,
were continually harassing the more obedient peoples, and showing
their dislike of Roman supremacy.[246] The war was tantalising and
difficult. The hardy highlanders knew every forest, mountain, and
valley, and the Roman soldiers could neither provide against sudden
attacks, not get at the enemy in their fastnesses. From fatigue and
anxiety Augustus fell ill and was obliged to retire to Tarraco, leaving
the conduct of the campaign to Gaius Antistius Vetus, who was able to
win several engagements, because after the retirement of Augustus the
natives ventured more frequently to appear in the open. Another of his
legates, Titus Carisius, took Lance (_Sallanco_); and finally Augustus
founded a colony of veterans among the Lusitani, called Augusta Emerita
(_Merida_), and another called Cæsar-Augusta (_Zaragossa_) among the
Editani, on the site of the ancient Salduba, from which all the great
roads to the Pyrennees branch off. The Cantabri were not crushed, but
they were quiet for a time. Ianus was closed, and Augustus returned at
the beginning of B.C. 24; and the courtier Horace is again called on
to celebrate a success, and to welcome the Emperor’s home-coming as of
a victor.[247] The Senate voted him a triumph, partly for the Spanish
campaign and partly for some successes of his legate, M. Vinicius, in
Gaul, who had caused his soldiers to proclaim Augustus imperator for the
eighth time. Augustus refused the triumph, but accepted the acclamation
of imperator—thus assuming as head of the army that what was everywhere
done was, to use the technical expression, done “under his auspices,”
and was to be reckoned to his credit. He also accepted honours for his
young nephew Marcellus, and his stepson Tiberius. The former was admitted
to the Senate with prætorian rank, and with ten years seniority for
office, in virtue of which he was at once elected ædile, though only in
his twentieth year; the latter was allowed five years’ seniority, and
at once elected quæstor in his nineteenth year. A triumphal arch was
also erected in honour of Augustus in the Alpine region.[248] The temple
of Ianus did not remain long closed, however. Soon after Augustus left
Spain the Cantabri and Astures again rose; and in B.C. 24 took place
the ill-judged and unfortunate expedition of Ælius Gallus into Arabia.
A march of six months’ duration, in which large numbers perished from
heat and disease and only seven men in actual fighting, was followed
by a retreat lasting sixty days. Gallus had been misled and duped
by the satrap of the Nabatæans, and all the hopes of splendid booty
were baffled. The expedition had been approved, if not suggested, by
Augustus, partly on the pretext of preventing incursions into Egypt;
but more, it would seem, because Arabia was regarded as an El Dorado,
where vast treasures of gold and jewels were to be found, accumulated
from the export of the rich spices of the country, which the inhabitants
were believed to keep jealously in a country as yet never pillaged by
an invader. As usual, the court poets echo the popular delusions, and
eulogise the certain success of the Emperor; Horace harps on the rich
“treasures of the Arabians,” their “well-stocked houses,” their “virgin
stores.” The Roman arms are to strike terror in the East and the Red Sea,
and are at length being employed on what is their proper and natural
foe.[249] Augustus, says another poet, is now a terror to the “homestead
of the yet unplundered Arabia.”[250] Happily this was an almost solitary
instance of such wild schemes, prompted by greed, and promoted by
ignorance and delusion. Augustus came to see that the frontiers of his
great empire afforded sufficient work for its military resources; but it
was not till near the end of his long life that a great military disaster
gave him a sharp reminder of the impolicy of pushing beyond them.

[Sidenote: New buildings at Rome.]

During these years the process of adorning Rome with splendid buildings
or restorations of old ones had been steadily going on. For the largest
number of these Augustus himself was responsible. In B.C. 28 the temple
of Apollo on the Palatine, with its colonnades and libraries, had been
dedicated. In the same year the restoration of 82 temples was begun on
his initiative, and apparently at his expense. The new temple of Mars
Ultor, vowed at Philippi, with its surrounding forum Augustum, was in
process of erection, as well as another to Iupiter Tonans on the Capitol,
vowed in the course of the Cantabrian expedition to commemorate a narrow
escape from being struck by lightning. He also completed the forum and
basilica partly erected by Iulius, had begun or projected the _porticus
Liviæ et Octaviæ_, and had erected the imposing rotunda intended as the
mortuary of the Iulian _gens_: while Statilius Taurus had built the first
amphitheatre, Plancus a great temple of Saturn, and Cornelius Balbus
was about to begin a new theatre. But most splendid of all were the
benefactions of Agrippa. Baths, bridges, colonnades, gardens, aqueducts,
were all dedicated by him to the use of the public. Above all, by B.C.
25 he had completed the magnificent Pantheon, still in its decline one
of the most striking buildings in the world. It was dedicated to Mars
and Venus, mythical ancestors of the Iulian _gens_, but its name may
be derived either from its numerous statues of the gods, or from the
supposed likeness of its dome to the sky. Its purpose—beyond being a
compliment to Augustus—is still a subject of dispute. Nor have we any
record of its use except as the meeting-place of the Arval brothers.[251]

[Sidenote: The illness and recovery of Augustus, B.C. 23.]

Great way, therefore, was already made towards justifying the boast of
Augustus that he found Rome brick and left it marble. For these buildings
were lined or paved with every kind of precious marble and stone. But
the year following his return from Spain witnessed a crisis in his
life as well as in his political position. He seems to have been in a
feeble state of health all through B.C. 24, the effect probably of his
fatigues and anxieties in Spain. But soon after entering on his eleventh
consulship in B.C. 23, he became so much worse that he believed himself
to be dying. It became necessary, therefore, to make provision for the
continuance of the government. Augustus had no hereditary office, and no
power of transmitting his authority. Still it was supposed that he was
training his nephew and son-in-law Marcellus, or his stepson Tiberius,
to be his successor. The former was curule-ædile, and seems to have
conceived the ambition of succeeding his uncle. But when he thought death
