approaching, Augustus did not designate either of these young men. He
handed his seal to Agrippa, and the official records of the army and
revenue to Cn. Calpurnius Piso, his colleague in the consulship. He would
play his part as constitutional magistrate to the last. To speculate
on what might have been is not very profitable. Agrippa had advised a
restoration of the republic in B.C. 30. But every year since then had
made it more difficult; and, if he had wished to do it, he would probably
have found it as impossible as his master had done, and would have had
to choose between supporting Marcellus and taking the direction of
affairs into his own hands. The difficulty, however, did not arise; for
owing either to the goodness of his constitution, or the skill of his
physician, Antonius Musa, Augustus recovered.

[Sidenote: The new constitutional settlement, B.C. 23.]

When he met the Senate once more he offered to read his will to prove
that he had been true to his constitutional obligations, and had named
no successor, but had left the decision in the hands of the Senate and
people. The Senators, however, declined to hear it, but insisted that the
powers which he had been exercising should be more clearly defined and
placed on a better legal footing. Accordingly a _Senatus-consultum_ was
drawn up, to be afterwards submitted to the centuriate assembly, giving
him a variety of powers, and forming a precedent which was followed in
the case of subsequent emperors. It began with a confirmation of the
_tribunicia potestas_, for life and unlimited as to place, with the right
of bringing business of any kind before the Senate (_ius relationis_).
It next gave him the _ius proconsulare_, both within and without the
pomærium, involving a _maius imperium_ in all provinces. Further, it gave
him the right of making treaties; the right of summoning, consulting,
and dismissing the Senate (_ius consulare_); the confirmation of all his
_acta_, “Whatever he shall think to be for the benefit and honour of the
republic in things divine and human, whether public or private”; finally,
exemption from the provisions of certain laws and _plebiscita_. Some
legal difficulty was apparently discovered afterwards as to the right of
proposing laws to the centuriate assembly, which was remedied in B.C.
19 by his receiving the full consular power for life, with the right
of having _lictors_, and sitting on the consular bench. This seems to
have been a concession to legal purists. He doubtless exercised the full
consular powers before; but a distinction was drawn by some between the
_ius consulare_ and the _imperium consulare_, and whatever doubt there
might be was now set at rest.

[Sidenote: The imperial powers.]

As the imperial powers may now be considered as fully developed, future
extensions being merely logical deductions from the constitution as now
established, it will be convenient here once for all to point out their
nature and extent. They may be classed under two headings—(1) _imperium_;
(2) _potestas tribunicia_.

The first—_imperium_—embraces all those powers which Augustus obtained as
representing the curule magistrates, or from special law and senatorial
decrees. As imperator, then, he had supreme command of all forces by
land or sea. The military oath was now taken in his name, no longer to
individual officers raising legions. He alone had the right to enrol
soldiers; he nominated the officers; his procurators paid the men in his
name; from him proceeded all rewards. The Senate, indeed, still awarded
triumphs and _triumphalia ornamenta_, but it was at his suggestion, and
the tendency was to confine the right of triumph to the Emperor himself.

By the same _imperium_ he decided on questions of peace or war; on the
distribution of the _ager publicus_, and the assignation of lands to
veterans and _coloni_ generally.

Finally, the right of conferring the citizenship, complete or partial,
and settling the status of all colonies and _municipia_, and of
interpreting the laws by a _constitutio principis_, expressed in an edict
or decree, which amounted, in fact, to legislative power.

The second—_potestas tribunicia_—was superior to the ordinary powers
of the tribunes, because by it he could veto their proceedings, while
they could not veto his. “It gave him”—to use Dio’s words—“the means of
absolutely putting a stop to any proceeding of which he disapproved;
it rendered his person inviolable, so that the least violence offered
him by word or deed made a man liable to death without trial as being
under a curse.” From the ancient constitution of the office also it
made him president of the _comitia tributa_ (representing the old
_consilia plebis_), gave him the right of interposing in all decisions of
magistrates or Senate affecting the persons or civil status of citizens
(_auxilii latio_), and that of compelling obedience by imprisonment or
other means, as in the republic the tribunes had done even to the consuls
in extreme cases (_coercitio_). Though this power was given the Emperor
for life, it was also in a sense annual; and it was in effect so much
the most important of all his powers, while at the same time in origin
and professed object so much the most popular, that it became the custom
from henceforth to date all documents, inscriptions, and the like, by the
year of the tribunician power from 27th of June this year (B.C. 23). The
_imperium_ was renewed at intervals of ten or five years, the tribunician
power of Augustus went on from year to year without break. It was now
unnecessary any longer to hold the consulship, for the _imperium_ given
him in other ways covered all, and more than all, which the consulship
could give. It was convenient to use it for rewarding others, as it
retained all its outward signs of dignity, and still in theory made
its holder head of the state, though in reality its duties had become
almost wholly ceremonial. He therefore abdicated the consulship, which he
did not hold again till B.C. 5, when he desired to give _éclat_ to his
grandson’s _deductio in forum_.

The clause in the _lex_, quoted above, also gave Augustus supreme control
of all religious matters, and made him able, among other things, to
nominate most of the members of the sacred colleges. He did not become
Pontifex Maximus till the death of Lepidus (B.C. 13). When that took
place he became official, as well as real, head of the Roman religion.

Certain other arrangements in regard to the city of Rome itself followed,
all in the direction of centralisation. Thus Augustus presided at the
review of the equites, which used to be held by the censors. Public
works were mostly entrusted to _curatores_ appointed by him; for the
supply of corn he named a _præfectus annonæ_; and for police a _præfectus
urbi_, under whom were the _cohortes urbanæ_, the night-watch and fire
brigade (_nocturni vigiles_). Each of these bodies had their own
officers or _præfecti_; but Augustus from time to time appointed some
one as _præfectus urbi_, to whom all alike would be subject. Such an
officer, however, did not always assume the name, and really as well as
theoretically the ultimate authority was Augustus himself, who later on,
by dividing Rome into _regiones_ and _vici_, made elaborate arrangements
for the effective policing of the city.

[Sidenote: The succession.]

Augustus might pose as a constitutional magistrate enjoying a life-tenure
of his office, without the right of transmitting it to an heir. This view
was strictly legal, but it was evident that such a power could not safely
be left by its holder without any understanding as to a successor. The
matter was indeed in the hands of Senate and people; but in the minds of
possible heirs, as well as of the Senate and people themselves, it began
to be thought natural and necessary that some arrangement of the sort
should be made. The cases are numerous in all history of rulers, whether
new or hereditary, who have wished to found or continue a dynasty, or
who have thought to prevent confusion and danger after their own death
by naming a successor, or by taking him into present partnership. Such a
scheme was not as yet fully developed, even if it was contemplated. But
Marcellus, who had been adopted by Augustus on his marriage to Iulia,
betrayed his hopes by protesting against the preference shewn by the
apparently dying Emperor to Agrippa; and Augustus yielded so far as to
send Agrippa from Rome as governor of Syria.

[Sidenote: Death of Marcellus.]

A sudden disaster, however, put an end to any intention that may have
been formed in regard to Marcellus. In the summer of B.C. 23, he was
attacked by fever, and Antonius Musa, who had successfully treated
Augustus by a _régime_ of cold baths, tried a similar treatment on the
young man with fatal effect. His death was a great grief to Augustus
and so severe a blow to Octavia, that she lived afterwards in complete
retirement. It produced a sensation in Rome such as has been witnessed
more than once among us at the death of an heir to the throne; and has
been immortalised by a celebrated passage inserted by Vergil in the sixth
book of the _Æneid_, a work in which Augustus was specially interested
as a consecration of the greatness of Rome and the hereditary dignity of
the Iulian _gens_. It is skilfully placed at the end of the catalogue of
Roman heroes whose souls are being reviewed by Anchises in the Elysian
realms, where they are waiting their time for entering the bodies of men
destined to make Roman history. The Marcellus of the Punic war naturally
introduces the younger shade, whose brief tenure of life is even now
foreshadowed by the cloud that hangs about his brow. When Vergil recited
the lines to the Emperor and his sorrowing sister, Octavia fainted from
emotion, and Augustus bestowed a splendid reward upon the poet. It may
help us to realise the scene if we once more read the familiar lines.
Æneas notices the mysterious and melancholy shade and eagerly questions
his father:—

    “‘What youth is this of glorious mien
    The noblest and the best between,
    Cheered to the echo? See, a cloud
    (The darkening shadow of the shroud)
    Hovers about him even now,
    And black night broods upon his brow.
    Is he some scion of the race,
    Destined our mighty line to grace?’

    Thus spake the son, the father sighed,
    And thus with rising tears replied:
    ‘Seek not, my son, to learn the woe,
    Your progeny is doomed to know.
    The fates will show and then withdraw
    The gift men loved but hardly saw.
    Too mighty, gods! for so you deemed,
    With such a prince Rome’s race had seemed!
    What sobs shall thrill the Martian plain!
    Ah, Tiber, what dark funeral train
    Your waves shall see, as past the Mound
    New-built you sweep your waters round!
    No scion of the Ilian stock
    Shall raise such hopes, such hopes shall mock.
    Ah, Romulus, thy land shall see
    No son to fire thy pride as he.
    Oh loyalty! Oh faith unstained!
    Oh strong right hand to yield untrained!
    Whether on foot he grasped the sword,
    Or charger’s flank with rowel scored,
    No foe would e’er have faced his steel
    Nor learnt what ’tis the vanquished feel.
    Oh child of many tears, if fate
    Shall not prevent your living date,
    Thou art Marcellus! Lilies fair
    Scatter in handfuls on his bier!
    Oh let me but his herse bestrew
    With flowers bright with purple hue.
    Vain gift! but let it still be paid
    To grace my far-off grandson’s shade.’”

The death of Marcellus had occurred in an unhealthy season when many
shared the same fate. Yet there were found people who attributed it to
Livia’s jealousy on behalf of her son Tiberius, and her anger at the
preference shown to the Emperor’s nephew. Scarcely any death occurred
in the imperial family that did not give rise to some such idle and
malevolent gossip. But the Emperor soon had cause to regret the absence
of Agrippa, who was living in Lesbos and administering Syria by his
legate. The next year was a year of sickness and scarcity at Rome, and
was also disturbed by more than one outbreak of political unrest, one
of the few conspiracies against the life of Augustus being detected and
punished. We do not know why Muræna and Fannius Cæpio plotted to kill
Augustus, if they really did so. It may be that the change made in the
principate in B.C. 23 seemed to them to be too much in the direction
of autocracy, or that the consulship without Augustus as colleague
suggested some idea that its old supremacy might be recovered. The
violent party strife which occurred later at the election for B.C. 21,
may have had some connection with the same feeling. Muræna had had a
successful career, had been rewarded by an augurship and a consulship
in B.C. 23, and there is nothing known which explains his conduct. It
may be that his offence was chiefly intemperance of language. Dio says
that he had a sharp tongue which spared no one, and Horace perhaps
meant to give him a hint in the ode addressed to him. Velleius tells
us that, unlike his fellow conspirator Fannius Cæpio, he was a man of
high character.[252] At any rate their execution—for both are said
to have been put to death—is one of the few instances of severity on
the part of Augustus since the civil war. This trouble was followed
by others—a renewed outbreak in Spain, riots at the elections, and a
coldness between himself and his devoted friend and minister Mæcenas,
caused, it is said, by his being supposed to have communicated to his
wife Terentia, the sister of Muræna, some secret as to the detection of
the plot. All these things must have caused Augustus much uneasiness. He
had left Rome in the summer of B.C. 22 for Sicily, intending to start
thence on another progress through the Eastern Provinces. There urgent
messages came to him to return and put a stop to the disturbances. He
did not wish to give up his Eastern journey and yet did not venture to
leave the city without some control. His thoughts turned naturally to
the support that had never failed him—to Agrippa. He was summoned home
primarily to take charge of Rome; but he came back to what seemed the
highest possible position next to that of the Emperor, and one that
promised a still greater one in the future. Augustus insisted on his
divorcing Marcella (daughter of Octavia) and marrying his own daughter
Iulia, left a widow by Marcellus. As usual Agrippa did all that was
imposed upon him well and thoroughly (B.C. 21-20). Having restored order
in the city, he next went to Gallia Narbonensis, where he not only put
a stop to some dangerous disturbances, but initiated great public works
in the way of roads and aqueducts. Passing to Spain he finally crushed
the Cantabri and Astures, who were again in arms. He seems indeed to
have suffered reverses in this war, as his master had done before, but
in the end he reduced them to submission. All this good work was done
while Augustus was in the East (B.C. 21-19), and for it he refused the
triumph offered him by the Senate at the instigation of the Emperor.
But his succession, should he survive the Emperor, was now secured by
his being associated with him in the _tribunicia potestas_ and other
prerogatives for five years at the first renewal of his powers in B.C.
17. Agrippa had now two sons by Iulia, Gaius born in B.C. 20, Lucius in
B.C. 17; and Augustus adopted both of them by the ancient process of a
fictitious purchase. He had now legitimate heirs and nothing farther was
done about the succession for some years. Agrippa died in March, B.C.
12, just as his period of tribunician power was expiring. But during
these years the two sons of Livia, Tiberius and Drusus, had begun those
services on the German frontier and among the Rhæti and other powerful
tribes which proved their vigour and ability. These services were
renewed, after a few months’ interval of quiet, in B.C. 13 and following
years. Accordingly Augustus seems to have meditated putting Tiberius in
much the same position as Agrippa had held. In B.C. 11 he compelled him
to divorce his wife Vipsania (a daughter of Agrippa) and marry Agrippa’s
widow Iulia, the Emperor’s only daughter. He thought still farther to
secure a line of descendants to succeed if necessary to his power. But he
made the mistake of neglecting sentiment. Tiberius was devotedly attached
to Vipsania, by whom he had a son, and could feel neither affection nor
respect for Iulia, who fancied that she lowered herself in marrying him.
The only thing that could compensate him for such a marriage was the
chance of succession, and that was barred by the existence of Gaius and
Lucius Cæsar. His only son by Iulia died, and before long her frivolity
and debaucheries disgusted him, and therefore, though associated in
the tribunician power for five years in B.C. 7, he sought and obtained
permission in the next year to retire to Rhodes, where he stayed seven
years in seclusion.

[Sidenote: Gaius and Lucius Cæsar.]

Meanwhile the boys were being brought up with a view to their splendid
future under the eye of Augustus, when he was at home, and often under
his personal instruction, accompanied him as they grew older on his
journeys, in a carriage preceding his own or riding by his side, and in
fact were treated in every way as real and much beloved sons. In the year
in which they assumed the _toga virilis_ (B.C. 5 and B.C. 2) Augustus
again entered upon the consulship, that the _deductio in forum_ should be
as brilliant and dignified as possible. The Senate was not behindhand;
from the day of taking the _toga virilis_ it voted that they should be
capable of taking part in public business, and each of them in turn was
designated consul, Gaius to enter upon his office that time five years.
A new dignity moreover was invented, each in turn being named by the
equites _princeps inventutis_. As Augustus was _princeps senatus_ as well
as _princeps civitatis_, each of these young men was to be the head of
the next _ordo_, the original condition for belonging to which was that
a man must be _iuvenis_. Both were members of the College of Augurs.
They were, in fact, treated as we expect to see princes of the blood and
