heirs-apparent treated.[253] But whatever was the intention of Augustus
or the expectation of the people, fate interposed ruthlessly. The
younger—Lucius—died first, on the 20th of August, A.D. 2, at Marseilles,
before he could enter on the consulship to which he had been designated;
the elder Gaius was sent into Asia in B.C. 1, where he entered upon his
consulship of A.D. 1. The object of his mission was to force Phraates
IV., king of the Parthians, to evacuate Armenia which he had invaded.
This was accomplished without fighting and by personal negotiation with
the Parthian king; but when he entered Armenia to take possession and
arrange for its restoration to its recognised king, he was wounded by
an act of treason under the walls of Artagera. Weakened by this wound,
and being in other respects in a feeble state of health and spirits, he
obtained leave from Augustus to lay down his command. He started on his
homeward journey, but died on the way at Limyra in Lycia the 23rd of
February, A.D. 4.

[Sidenote: Tiberius finally fixed upon as successor.]

The succession was once more uncertain. The members of the imperial
family at this time were few. Of the children of Agrippa and Iulia
Agrippa Postumus was barely sixteen, and his two sisters, the younger
Iulia and Agrippina a few years older. Drusus, the younger brother of
Tiberius, had married Antonia, daughter of Marcus Antonius and Octavia,
and had left three children, Germanicus, b. B.C. 15, Livia b. B.C. 12,
and Claudius (afterwards Emperor) b. B.C. 10. Augustus meant to provide
a new line of descendants by marrying Agrippina to Germanicus, but that
did not take place till about A.D. 5. Meanwhile, probably on Livia’s
suggestion, he turned his thoughts to his stepson Tiberius, who had
divorced Iulia and had a son (Drusus) by his former wife Vipsania, who
was married to his cousin Livia. There is no good evidence that Augustus
entertained any but warm feelings for Tiberius, and he certainly had
had good reason to respect his military abilities and energy. He seems
to have been hurt at his prolonged stay at Rhodes and to have regarded
it as a sign that Tiberius cared nothing for him and his family. He
had therefore discouraged his return two years before, though he had
given him the position of legatus as a colourable pretext for staying
abroad without loss of dignity. Upon the death of Lucius, however, he
seems to have wished him to return to Rome. Tiberius did so, partly
on the instigation of his mother, and partly, perhaps, because he had
reason to expect the hostility of Gaius, and yet had judged from the
latter’s visit to him on his way to Syria that he was not likely to be a
formidable rival; for he was at once somewhat arrogant and weak, and was
surrounded by injudicious and dishonest advisers. On his return he for
some time lived in retirement and refrained from all public business.
But when the death of Gaius was announced (A.D. 4) Augustus adopted
Tiberius and Agrippa Postumus, having first arranged that Tiberius
should adopt his nephew Germanicus. The adoption of Agrippa Postumus
was shortly afterwards annulled, and he was banished to an island under
surveillance.[254]

There was now therefore a regular line of succession. Tiberius indeed had
no drop of Iulian blood in his veins, but adoption according to Roman
law and sentiment placed him exactly in the same position as that of a
naturally born son, and by his son’s marriage to Antonia, his adoption of
Germanicus, and the marriage of the latter to Agrippina, it seemed that
there was security that after him must come some one who was collaterally
or directly descended from Augustus. In the same year (A.D. 4) Tiberius
was once more associated with Augustus in the tribunician power for ten
years.[255] There could be no longer any doubt who would succeed. At the
death of Augustus there would be, if Tiberius survived, a man already
possessed of the most important of his functions; and his position
was still farther strengthened in the last year of the Emperor’s life
by being associated also in his _imperium proconsulare_. This gave him
authority in the provinces and the command of all military forces; and
we find him, in fact, upon the death of Augustus giving the watchword at
once to the prætorian guard.

Augustus therefore is responsible for the principate of Tiberius, though
some of its powers had to be formally bestowed by a decree of the
Senate. Did he do ill or well in this? Hardly any emperor left behind
him such an evil reputation as Tiberius. His funeral procession was
greeted with shouts of “Tiberius to the Tiber,” the Senate did not vote
him the usual divine honours, and Tacitus has exerted all his skill to
make his name infamous. A gallant attempt has been made by Mr. Tarver to
plead for a rehearing of the case, and to shew that Tiberius was pure
in private life and admirable as a ruler. I for one agree with him in
rejecting as unproved slander and often as physically impossible the
charges of monstrous immoralities raked up both by Tacitus and Suetonius,
often, no doubt, from the prurient gossip of Rome, which has never been
surpassed for foulness. The same summary rejection cannot, I think, be
applied to the formidable list of his cruelties. But these mainly fell
upon members of the imperial family and their adherents; they did not
affect the Empire at large. Augustus could not foresee these family and
dynastic tragedies; but he judged, and apparently judged rightly, that
he was leaving a successor whose prudence and sagacity, in spite of
what seemed a sullen reserve, would secure the peace and prosperity of
the Empire as a whole. There is nothing to prove that Augustus regarded
him otherwise than affectionately. If he turned out to be the monster
represented by his enemies, Augustus no doubt made a grave mistake. It is
a ridiculous suggestion that he deliberately designated him his successor
in order that people might regret himself. Such recondite snares for
posthumous fame are more like the cunning of a madman than the motives
influencing a reasonable being. Suetonius, who reports the suggestion,
says that after mature reflection he is convinced that a man so careful
and prudent as Augustus must have acted on better motives; must have
weighed the virtues and faults of Tiberius and decided that the former
predominated. As a matter of fact Augustus had little choice. Agrippa
Postumus was impossible; Germanicus might have served, but he could never
have displaced his uncle without a struggle. At the time of Tiberius’
adoption he was only nineteen, and Augustus could not reckon on the ten
more years of life which in fact remained for him. No doubt in these last
years of his life Augustus had come to see that some sort of hereditary
principle was necessary to prevent civil war at every vacancy. In B.C. 23
he had ignored that principle altogether, and as far as he could without
naming an heir had put Agrippa in the way of the succession. But Agrippa
had now been dead nearly sixteen years, and Augustus had had no minister
since either so able or so faithful. Like Cromwell in his last hours, he
was driven to recognise the conveniency of the hereditary principle; and
though the practical designation of Tiberius was apparently a breach of
it, yet by means of the adoptions and marriages which he had arranged,
it best prepared for its continuance hereafter. It was one of those
politic compromises which had characterised his whole policy. It moreover
best secured the position and safety of the beloved Livia; and it set
a precedent which was often followed with advantage in after-times,
when military arrogance and violence did not overpower every other
consideration, that an Emperor’s natural heir should be his successor,
or at any rate some one closely allied to him; and that in case of the
failure or complete unworthiness of such an heir a prudent emperor should
provide for the succession by adoption.




CHAPTER X

THE IMPERIAL AND MILITARY POLICY OF AUGUSTUS

    _Tu regere imperio populos,_
    _Romane, memento._


[Sidenote: The extension of the Empire under Augustus.]

At the end of his life Augustus left, among other memoirs, a roll
containing certain maxims of state which he thought important for his
successors to observe. Among them was an injunction not to seek to
increase the Empire, for it would be difficult to guard an extended
frontier. His own policy had been directed generally on this principle.
Such additions as were made in his time were mainly those rendered
inevitable by the necessity of securing the already existing frontiers.
When his generals went beyond that they met with difficulties and
sometimes with disaster.[256] The additions actually made were (1) in
Africa: Egypt was made a province in B.C. 30, at first almost as a
private possession of the Emperor, though in B.C. 10 it was, nominally
at any rate, put on the same footing as the other provinces. Mauretania,
on the other hand, though made a province in B.C. 33, was restored to
independence under King Iuba in B.C. 25. (2) In Asia a new province of
Galatia was formed in B.C. 25, with a capital at Ancyra, and embracing
several districts, such as Lycaonia, Isauria, Pamphylia, and parts of
Phrygia. (3) In the West, sometime before A.D. 6, Mœsia, answering to
the modern Servia and Bulgaria, was made a province as a barrier of
the Empire on the Danube. So also Illyricum, in B.C. 9-8, was extended
to the Danube by the addition of Pannonia; Noricum, also on the Danube,
was held in subjection, if not fully organised as a province, after B.C.
16; and Rhætia (modern Bavaria) was put under a Roman procurator after
B.C. 15. All these additions were clearly rendered necessary in order to
protect the line of the Danube as the frontier of the Empire. Lastly, on
the reorganisation of Gaul in four provinces (B.C. 16-14), two districts
along the left bank of the Lower Rhine, called Germania Superior and
Germania Inferior, were also occupied and partly organised, while some
minor Alpine districts, Alpes Maritimæ (Savoy and Nice), Alpes Cottiæ
(Susa and district), Alpes Penninæ (Canton du Valois) were taken over
and administered sometimes independently and sometimes as part of other
provinces. In these cases again the extension was merely consequential,
the inevitable result of having a long frontier to defend against
invading tribes.[257] The Rhine and the Danube then became the limits
of the Empire. We shall have occasion to see immediately what dangers
awaited an attempt to go beyond them.

[Sidenote: The East.]

Augustus twice spent periods of between two and three years in the East,
engaged in resettling frontiers and re-organising the Roman provinces.

After the victory at Actium (B.C. 31) he remained in the East till B.C.
29. The changes then made chiefly consisted in upsetting most of the
arrangements which had been made by Antony with various client kings,
and in favour of the children of Cleopatra. Thus Cyprus, which had been
restored to Cleopatra, was now separated from Egypt and made a province;
the coast towns of Syria and Palestine were reunited to the province of
Syria; certain cities of Crete and Cyrene, Iudæa and Ituræa, and of
Cilicia, which Antony had assigned to Cleopatra’s son, Cæsarion, were
either reunited to the provinces or declared free, as was also the case
with other districts and towns assigned by Antony to his own son by
Cleopatra. Certain client kings, however, were allowed to retain their
territory and dignity, such as Herod in Iudæa, Amyntas in Galatia,
Archelaus in Cappadocia. But the eternal question in the East was that
of the Parthians. They not only were resolved to maintain the Euphrates
as the limit beyond which Roman power was not to pass, but they had
frequently made raids upon Syria, and were always attempting to occupy
Armenia, which was a Roman protectorate, and the intervening kingdom
of Media. The disaster of Crassus in Mesopotamia, and the chequered
operations of Antony, had all sprung from these facts. When Augustus
arrived in Asia the state of things which had finally resulted from
the operations of Antony was that Artaxes (whose father, Artavasdes,
had been treacherously captured by Antony and afterwards put to death
by Cleopatra) was king of Armenia, and had attacked Media and captured
its king Artavasdes; and that Phraates had recovered his kingdom of
Parthia. Augustus had two or three advantages in dealing with these
complications. He found the brothers of the Armenian Artaxes still
prisoners at Alexandria, and sent them to Rome as hostages. Again the
captured king of Media managed to escape and appealed to him for help;
and, lastly, Phraates of Parthia had only just recovered his throne,
from which he had been expelled by a rebellion headed by Tiridates, and
the latter escaped to Syria and sent to implore the help of Augustus,
while legates from Phraates also arrived soliciting his support. Augustus
availed himself skilfully of these complications to assume the position
of a lord paramount and arbiter. He allowed Tiridates to remain in
safety in Syria; but he treated the legates of Phraates in a friendly
manner, and cordially invited a son of that king to accompany him to
Rome, where, however, he was kept as a hostage. Artavasdes was set up in
Lesser Armenia to form a check upon Artaxes. These diplomatic successes
were regarded in Rome, as we have seen, as veritable triumphs over the
dangerous Parthians—the only name much known there. The abolition of the
arrangements of Antony, which had involved the curtailment of the Roman
Empire, was recorded on coins struck in B.C. 29, with a head of Augustus
on the obverse, and on the reverse a figure of victory standing on the
mystic cista, with the legend _Asia recepta_. But it is with his second
Eastern progress (B.C. 22-19) that the useful public works, such as roads
and buildings, of which traces are still found, probably began.

[Sidenote: Movements in the East between B.C. 24 and B.C. 22.]

Between these two visits there had been only two movements of serious
importance—the useless and almost disastrous expedition of Ælius
Gallus into Arabia (B.C. 24-3), and the invasion of Southern Egypt at
Elephantine by Candace, queen of Æthiopia, encouraged by the diminution
of the Roman forces in Egypt during the Arabian expedition. The
Æthiopians gained some minor successes over three Roman cohorts stationed
near the frontier, but were eventually repulsed by the præfect Gaius
Petronius, who pursued them to their capital town Nabata, which he took
and plundered.[258]

[Sidenote: Second Eastern progress, B.C. 22-19.]

The second eastward progress of Augustus began with some months’
residence in Sicily. There he was busied in founding colonies, of which
seven are named. The chief town of Sicily was still Syracuse, but it
seems to have suffered in the time of Sextus Pompeius, and Augustus
placed in it two thousand settlers, probably veterans. It was the object
of such colonies to provide for veterans and poor Italians, but also
to Romanise countries more completely, and to introduce an industrial
class. Sicily needed above all things free cultivators. Its corn trade
had suffered from the competition of Africa, Sardinia, and Egypt, and
its pastoral farms were largely owned by Roman capitalists, who did not
reside, but employed slave-labour directed by bailiffs or _villici_.[259]
One object at least, therefore, of these measures of Augustus was to
bring into the country a class of small landowners residing on their
property. Land was found for them by purchase, where there was no _ager
publicus_ available.

[Sidenote: Augustus in Greece B.C. 21.]

From Sicily Augustus passed to Greece and wintered at Samos. Achaia
was a senatorial province, but the Emperor, we may notice, exercised
complete authority there. He had already established two colonies—at
Actium and Patræ, and he seems to have devoted most of his attention
to promoting their interests. He compelled the inhabitants of several
townships in the neighbourhood of both towns to migrate to the new
colonies, and he insisted on the colony at Actium being admitted to the
Amphictyonic League. The places were well chosen for naval purposes, but
the element of compulsion in his policy towards them was unfortunate.
He does not appear to have done much for Greece generally. It was in
a lamentably decaying state, the population declining, and old towns
disappearing. Nearly the only exception was the Iulian colony at Corinth.
Such changes as Augustus made on this visit rather tended to emphasise
this state of things, and certainly did nothing to relieve it. Athens,
which retained nothing of its greatness except its past and the still
surviving reputation as a university town (though Marseilles was running
it hard even in that), had disgraced itself in his eyes by the display of
sympathy, first for the Pompeians against Iulius, again for Brutus and
Cassius against the triumvirs, and lastly for Antony against himself. A
town always on the losing side can expect little favour. It was deprived
of its few remaining extra-Attic dependencies, Ægina and Eretria, and
was forbidden to avail itself of almost the only source of revenue
left—the fees which certain persons were still willing to pay for the
honour of being enrolled as its citizens. Sparta, indeed, was rewarded
by the restoration of Cythera, in return, it is said, for hospitality
to Livia when in exile with her former husband; but, on the other hand,
it was deprived of the control over its harbour town of Gythium. But
though both Iulius and Augustus favoured Sparta, as against Athens—a fact
commemorated by a temple to Iulius and an altar to Augustus—it remained
completely insignificant.

Very different was his policy in Asia. There Augustus set himself to
restore the prosperity of the towns by grants of money, by relief from
or readjustment of tribute, and by the promotion of useful public works.
Nor were details of local administration and internal reforms neglected.
Edicts are preserved which touch on such matters as the age of local
magistrates, or the succession to the property of intestates in Bithynia,
shewing with what minute care he studied local interests and problems.
It was now probably that schemes were set on foot for opening up the
country by roads, afterwards carried out by his legates. Milestones are
being now discovered along the _via Sebaste_ connecting the six Pisidian
colonies dated in the eighteenth year of his tribunician power (B.C. 6)
and a marble temple to Augustus still stands at Ancyra (_Angora_), to
witness the gratitude of these Asiatic cities. At the same time disorder
or illegal conduct was sternly punished. Cyzicus was deprived of its
_libertas_ for having flogged and put to death some Roman citizens, and
the same punishment was awarded for their internal disorders to Tyre and
