Sidon, whose ancient liberties had been secured to them by Antony when he
handed over the country to Cleopatra.

[Sidenote: Return of the standards by the Parthians.]

But of all his achievements during this progress nothing made such a
sensation in the Roman world, or was so much celebrated by the poets of
the day, as the fact that he received back from the Parthian king the
Roman eagles and standards lost by Crassus in B.C. 53, by Antony’s legate
Decidius Saxa in B.C. 40, and by Antony himself in B.C. 36 in a battle
with Parthians and Medes. Those taken by the Medes had been returned to
him, but not those taken by the Parthians. In B.C. 23 Tiridates, who
had been allowed to take refuge in Syria in B.C. 30, came to Rome, and
Phraates, to counteract his appeal, sent ambassadors thither also. After
consulting the Senate Augustus declined to give up Tiridates, but he
sent back to Phraates the son whom he had kept at Rome for the last six
years on condition that the king should restore the standards. Pressed
though he was by the disaffection of his subjects, Phraates had not
yet fulfilled his bargain. But perhaps this disaffection had by B.C.
20 become more acute, or he was alarmed by the promptness with which
Augustus asserted Roman supremacy in Armenia. Artaxes had ruled ill and
had been insubordinate. Augustus appears to have meditated an expedition
against him, but his subjects anticipated the difficulty by assassinating
him. Augustus says that he might have made Armenia a province, but
preferred to allow the ancient kingdom to remain. Accordingly on his
order Tiberius went to Armenia and with his own hand placed the diadem
on the head of Tigranes, brother of the late king, who had been living
in exile at Rome. Thus the supremacy of Augustus was acknowledged in
Armenia and its king ruled by his permission. A coin struck in B.C.
19 represents it as a real capture of Armenia, having on its reverse
_Cæsar Div. F. Armen. capt. Imp. viiii._ The Parthian king thought it
well now to fulfil his bargain, and again Tiberius was commissioned to
receive the captured standards in Syria. With the standards were also
some prisoners; though there were others who had in the thirty-three
years that had elapsed since the fall of Crassus settled peaceably in
Parthian territory, married wives, and now refused to return.[260] Such
a contented abandonment of their native land seemed shocking to the
orthodox Roman, unable to suppose life worth living among barbarians
for one who had once been a citizen of the Eternal City. Prisoners of
war were never much valued at Rome. It was the traditional maxim that
the state never paid ransom, though private friends might and did, and
Horace’s ode may be meant to support the Emperor’s refusal of some
demand of Phraates for ransom of prisoners to accompany the standards.
This transaction, however, was the crown of the Emperor’s work in the
East. It is commemorated on coins of B.C. 19 bearing a triumphal arch,
with Augustus receiving the standards, on the obverse, and the legend
_civibus et signis militaribus a Parthis receptis_ on the reverse. The
poets were not behind with their compliments. Vergil, who was in Greece
in this the last year of his life, seems to have inserted three lines in
his description of opening the doors of Bellona to bring in an allusion
to it.[261] Horace, who had for the time given up lyric poetry, yet
contrives a compliment in one of his epistles;[262] and, on returning
to lyric poetry in B.C. 13-12, is careful to include it among the great
services of Augustus; and Propertius, after prophetic suggestions as to
what will be done, at last burst out into a triumphant hymn of praise
over the achievements of these years, and, above all, on the Nemesis that
has come for the slaughtered Crassus.[263] Many years afterwards Ovid
takes the opportunity in describing the temple of Mars Ultor, in which
Augustus deposited the recovered standards, to glorify him for having
wiped out an old and shameful stain upon the Roman arms.[264] There
were many other arrangements made with the client kings of Asia, all of
which were accompanied by the strict condition that they were henceforth
to confine themselves to the territories now assigned to them and were
to make no wars of aggression. The _pax augusta_ was to be strictly
maintained everywhere.

[Sidenote: Augustus returns from the East, B.C. 19.]

All this had been done without any drop of blood shed in war, and
Augustus was able to devote the winter of B.C. 20-19 at Samos to rest and
enjoyment, receiving numerous embassies from all parts, as far as from
India. The Indian envoys brought him a present of tigers, a beast never
before seen in Greece or Italy, and a wonderful armless dwarf who could
draw a bow and throw javelins with his feet. He returned next year by way
of Athens, where he was initiated in the Eleusinian mysteries and where
he met with Vergil. The poet joined the Emperor’s train, visited Megara
with him, and returned with him to Italy, only to fall ill at Brundisium
and die (September 22).

[Sidenote: Troubles in the West. Defeat of Lollius, B.C. 16.]

Though Augustus returned to Rome amidst loud congratulations, the Western
part of the Empire was not yet at peace, and in fact there were many
threatening signs of future trouble. Agrippa, indeed, in the very year
of the Emperor’s return from the East, crushed the rebellious Cantabri
and Astures, not without severe fighting; but though Augustus was able
now to remain at home, passing laws, holding the secular games, and
strengthening his family by adopting Agrippa’s children, the Empire was
not at peace, the Ianus Quirinus still stood open. There were, in fact,
a number of “little wars,” mostly frontier raids. Thus in B.C. 17-16, P.
Silius Nerva was engaged with various Alpine tribes, and in repelling an
inroad of Pannonians. There were also about the same time brief outbursts
in Spain and Dalmatia, and inroads of barbarous tribes (Dentheletæ and
Scordisci) into Macedonia. In Thrace the guardian of the sons of Cotys
had to be assisted against the Bessi, and the Sauromatæ had to be driven
back across the Danube. These were comparatively unimportant affairs, But
a more serious danger was caused by some warlike German tribes—Sugambri,
Usipetes, and Tencteri—crossing the Rhine and invading Gallia Belgica.
They defeated some Roman cavalry, and while pursuing them came up with
Lollius and his main army, which they again defeated, capturing the
eagle of the Fifth Legion. Suetonius says that the affair was rather
disgraceful than really disastrous. But it seemed sufficiently serious
to Augustus. Agrippa was away in the East looking after Syria and Asia,
and did not return till B.C. 13; and he resolved to go to Gaul himself,
taking with him Tiberius, and leaving Drusus to carry on the latter’s
prætorship. The Germans, however, had no wish to fight a regular imperial
army, they therefore retired beyond the Rhine, and made terms and gave
hostages.

[Sidenote: Administration of Gaul, B.C. 16-14.]

Augustus nevertheless found enough to do without positive fighting in
introducing improvements and reforms. At Nemausus the old gate of the
town walls still stands, inscribed with his name, and dated in the
seventh year of his tribunician power (B.C. 16); he had, moreover, to
listen to long tales of grievances caused by the extortions of Licinius,
the procurator at Lugdunum. This man’s career was an early example of
that of the rich freedmen of later times. Brought as prisoner from Gaul
by Iulius Cæsar, and apparently emancipated by Octavian in accordance
with his uncle’s will, he had by some means amassed an immense fortune,
and retained the favour of Augustus by large contributions to the
public works from time to time promoted by the Emperor. A millionaire
disposed to such liberality is always welcome to a sovereign with a
taste for expensive reforms. As a Gaul by birth, Augustus seems to have
supposed that he would be a sympathetic officer. But he proved more
Roman than the Romans in exacting the last farthing. We are reminded
of “Morton’s fork” and of Empson and Dudley, when we are told that he
insisted on certain monthly payments being made fourteen times in the
year, on the ground that November and December meaning the ninth and
tenth months, there must be two more to be accounted for! The complaints
were so serious, however, that Licinius thought it necessary to offer to
surrender his whole property to Augustus, as though he had only amassed
it for the public service, with the deliberate purpose of weakening the
disloyal natives. We are not told whether he was left in power, but
at any rate he escaped punishment and survived Augustus. He probably
was recalled to Rome, where he tried to pacify public indignation by
large contributions to the restoration of the Curia Iulia, which was
re-dedicated in honour of the Emperor’s grandsons about A.D. 12.

[Sidenote: Campaigns of Tiberius and Drusus, B.C. 15.]

But another and more serious trouble had now to be faced. The Rhæti,
inhabiting the modern Grisons, Tyrol, and parts of Lombardy, were making
raids upon Gaul and Italy, burning and slaying and plundering. With them
were allied the Vindelici (inhabiting parts of modern Baden, Wurtenburg,
and S. Bavaria), with other Alpine tribes.[265] The campaign against
these tribes was intrusted to Tiberius, who conceived a masterly plan
which was crowned with brilliant success. Drusus was summoned from Rome
to guard the passes into Lombardy, and in the valleys of the Tridentine
Alps at the entrance of the Brenner pass, near the Lacus Benacus (Lago
di Garda), he won a brilliant victory over them, and forced many of
their mountain strongholds. Shut off thus from Italy they turned their
armies towards Helvetic Gaul, but were met by Tiberius and again
defeated between Bâle and the Lake of Constance. These two defeats seem
practically to have annihilated these tribes, and they gave no further
trouble. It was after this that Noricum was annexed, and Rhætia and
Vindelicia conquered, and presently formed into the province Rhætia.

[Sidenote: At the end of B.C. 14 Augustus returns to Rome.]

[Sidenote: B.C. 13.]

Still Augustus had to stay on another year in Gaul. Risings had to be
suppressed among the Ligurians of the Maritime Alps, and in Pannonia;
while Agrippa, who had returned from Palestine accompanied or followed by
Herod, went to Sinope, on the Pontus, to put down a disturbance that had
arisen owing to a disputed claim to the crown of the Cimmerian Bosporus,
which an usurper named Scribonius had seized. At the end of B.C. 14, or
the beginning of B.C. 13, Augustus returned to Rome with Tiberius, who
entered then upon his first consulship, and there they were also joined
by Agrippa. Whether the temple of Ianus was now closed for the third time
is not certain. But there are some good reasons for supposing that it
was. In two passages, Horace, writing in B.C. 13, speaks of it as though
it were a recent occurrence; Dio, in speaking of the return of Augustus,
says that he came back after “having settled all the affairs of the
Gauls, Germanies and Spains”; there was certainly a lull in the German
trouble, where Drusus had been left in command; and lastly an inscription
recording the extension of the great road to Gades in Southern Spain,
has the date of this year, and records the closing of Ianus in honour
of Augustus. None of these are in themselves absolute proofs, but taken
together they form a strong presumption.[266] At any rate, Augustus
returned to Rome with the feeling that he had secured peace. Though he,
as usual, avoided meeting a complimentary procession by entering the city
after nightfall, yet he came with laurelled fasces. The next morning,
after greeting a crowd of people on the Capitol, he caused the laurels to
be taken off and solemnly laid on the knees of Jupiter, and the first
business he transacted in the Senate was the settlement of the claims of
his soldiers. But the peace did not last long. Augustus himself spent the
next three years in Italy busied with the census, the lectio senatus,
legislation, and various ceremonies. Lepidus died in the early part of
this year, and he was at once declared Pontifex Maximus, though the
_inauguratio_ did not take place till the following February.

[Sidenote: Death of Agrippa, B.C. 12.]

However, before the year was ended, news came of disturbances in
Pannonia, and Agrippa—once more associated in the tribunician power—was
sent thither. He had no fighting, for the rising was abandoned at his
approach. It was his last journey. Next spring he was taken ill in one
of his Campanian villas. Augustus threw all business aside and hastened
to his house, but arrived too late. Never had ruler a more faithful or
abler friend and servant. At every crisis of his life Agrippa had been by
his side, and wherever danger was most threatening he had taken the post
of difficulty and honour. If he gained wealth in his master’s service,
he was always ready to spend it in support of his master’s aims. In the
interests of the dynasty he had sunk all private wishes and ambitions.
About Agrippa the passion for prurient scandal, characteristic of the
age and people, for once is silent, and not a single line or innuendo
survives to impeach his private or public life. Augustus shewed both his
respect and deep feeling. He accompanied the body to Rome, pronounced the
funeral oration himself, and deposited the ashes in the new mausoleum
which he had erected for his own family.

[Sidenote: Tiberius in Pannonia.]

The news of Agrippa’s death seems to have encouraged the Pannonians
once more to strike for freedom. Tiberius accordingly was appointed to
succeed him in the command. He laid waste wide portions of their country,
inflicted much slaughter upon the inhabitants, and seems quickly to have
reduced them to obedience, though only for a time.

[Sidenote: Drusus in Germania B.C. 12-9.]

Meanwhile Drusus was not idle. The Sugambri and their allies crossed the
Rhine into the district called Lower Germany, a part of Belgium (now
North Brabant), where they would find tribes nearly allied to themselves,
and willing to shake off the Roman yoke. Drusus had been engaged in the
consecration of an altar to Augustus at Lugdunum, where he had invited
the attendance of leading Gauls from all these provinces. He hurried back
to the Rhine and drove the invaders over the river, and then throwing a
bridge across it (somewhere below Cologne), he attacked the Usipites on
the right bank of the Lupia, and then marched up the Rhine to attack the
Sugambri. But there was a fleet of ships supporting him in the Rhine. He
cut a canal from the River to Lake Flevo (Zuyder Zee), so that this fleet
might sail up the coast to the mouths of the three rivers—the Amisia,
Visurgis, and Albis (_Ems_, _Weser_, _Elbe_). He proposed to make the
Elbe the limit of the Roman Empire, instead of the Rhine; but in this
first year only reduced the coast as far as the Visurgis. The next year
(B.C. 11), he advanced by land to the same river, only farther inland,
and occupied the country of the Cherusci (Westphalia), and though on
their way home his men were nearly caught in an ambush, they got back
safely to the banks of the Lupia, and several forts were established in
various parts of the country. The next year (B.C. 10) he was engaged
with the Chatti (Hessen), who endeavoured to regain the territories from
which he had driven them in the previous year.[267] In B.C. 9, being
now consul, he pushed as far as the Elbe, where he erected a trophy to
mark the extreme limit of the Roman advance, through the land of the
Chatti and Trevi. But on his return march he fell and broke his leg, and
there being no skilled physician with the army, he died after thirty
days’ suffering. Besides these marches into Germany, he had, during his
command, established a line of fortresses on the Lower Rhine, to the
number of fifty, as far up the stream as Argentoratum (Strassburg).

[Sidenote: Tiberius in Germany B.C. 8-7.]

On hearing of his brother’s accident, Tiberius, who was at Ticinum,
hurried to his side, was with him when he died, and accompanied the
corpse on foot back to Rome, where he delivered a funeral oration, and
Augustus, who returned from Lugdunum at this time, another. The ashes
were placed in the Mausoleum of Augustus. Tiberius was appointed to
succeed him on the Rhine, and in B.C. 8 crossed the river to attack the
Sugambri. But as the other tribes made their submission, the Sugambri
were induced to send some of their leading men to negotiate also.
Augustus then took a step which requires, at any rate, some explanation.
He seized these legates and kept them in confinement in various towns as
hostages. It had the immediate effect, however, of keeping the Sugambri
quiet, large numbers of them were settled on the left bank of the Rhine,
and Tiberius was able to come home for his triumph in B.C. 7, with which
the name of Drusus was also associated.

No wars of any consequence disturbed the peace of the Empire for nearly
nine years. Tiberius retired to Rhodes in B.C. 6, and his successors in
the command of the army of the Rhine had the task of maintaining and
strengthening the conquests of Drusus. The two districts on the left bank
of the river, Germania Inferior and Superior, though for some purposes
they belonged to Gallia Belgica, yet as military districts were distinct,
and they included some fortresses on the right bank of the Rhine. The
country between the Rhine and the Elbe was in an ambiguous position. It
was not a province, and yet the commanders on the Rhine occupied as much
of it as they could from time to time maintain.

[Sidenote: Tiberius again in Germany and Illyricum, A.D. 4-7.]

But in A.D. 4 Tiberius, now returned from Rhodes, and adopted son of
Augustus, took over the command on the Rhine, and immediately began a
great forward movement like that of his brother Drusus. He too advanced
to the Weser and reduced the Cherusci who were in revolt; and after
marching to the Lippe again, advanced to the Elbe (A.D. 5), reducing
the Chauci and Longobardi, this time with the support of a fleet that
entered the mouth of the Elbe. Some others thought it safer to send
envoys and make terms of friendship with Rome. Next year (A.D. 6) he was
to attack the Marcomanni under a powerful leader named Marobudus. The
attack was to be made from two sides. C. Sextius Saturninus, an able
and experienced officer, was to lead one army from the Rhine, through
the territory of the Chatti (near Cologne), while Tiberius himself led
another from Noricum across the Danube. The two were to converge upon
the district now occupied by the Marcomanni answering to the modern
Bohemia. Tiberius was accompanied by the governor of Pannonia (Valerius
Messalinus), and a large part of the troops stationed there. But the
expedition was prevented by a sudden rising in Pannonia and Dalmatia. The
