inhabitants of these countries had not become reconciled to Roman rule;
they felt the burden of the tribute, and the opportunity afforded by the
withdrawal of so many troops was eagerly seized. Tiberius was forced to
offer terms to Marobudus, which he accepted, and hurry back to Pannonia,
while Saturninus returned to the Rhine for fear of an outbreak there.
The rising in Pannonia and Dalmatia was with difficulty suppressed after
a weary struggle lasting between three and four years. Many legions had
to be drafted into the country from other provinces as well as large
auxiliary forces. Germanicus was summoned to assist with a new army, and
Augustus himself came to Ariminum to be near at hand. Suetonius affirms
that it was the most serious struggle in which the Romans had been
engaged since the Punic wars. In B.C. 9 Tiberius indeed returned to Rome
to claim his triumph, but had to go back to put a last touch to the war.

[Sidenote: The fall of Varus, A.D. 9.]

Meanwhile the army of the Rhine had been under the command of P.
Quintilius Varus. Velleius gives an unfavourable account of him. He
was more a courtier than a soldier, and in his government of Syria had
shown himself greedy of money. “He entered a rich province a poor man,
and left a poor province a rich one.” From the time of his accession to
the command in B.C. 7 he seems to have regarded the country between the
Rhine and Elbe as completely reduced to the form of a Roman province,
and proceeded to levy tribute with the same strictness as he had been
used to do in Syria. But the German tribes did not regard themselves as
Roman subjects. The Romans were only masters of so much as their camps
could control. While Varus was living in fancied security in his summer
camp on the Weser, busied only with the usual legal administration of a
provincial governor, four great German peoples, the Cherusci, Chatti,
Marsi, and Bructeri, were secretly combining under the lead of the
Cheruscan chief, Arminius, to strike a blow for liberty. As the autumn of
A.D. 9 approached Varus prepared to return to the regular winter quarters
on the Rhine (Castra Vetera). Arminius, who had served in the Roman
army, and had been rewarded by the citizenship and the rank of eques,
had ingratiated himself with Varus, and was fully acquainted with his
plans, and though Varus had been warned of his treachery he seems to have
taken no heed. In order to bring him through the difficult country where
the ambush was to await him, a rising of a tribe off his direct road to
the Lower Rhine was planned. He fell into the trap, and turning aside to
chastise the rebellious tribe, was caught in a difficult pass, somewhere
between the sources of the Lippe and Ems, and he and nearly the whole
of his army perished. For three days the army struggled through a thick
and almost pathless forest, encumbered by a heavy baggage train, and a
number of women and children, attacked and slaughtered at nearly every
step by the Germans who were concealed in the woods, and continually made
descents upon them. A miserable remnant was saved by the exertions of L.
Asprenas, a legate of Varus, who had come to the rescue. Varus and some
of his chief officers appear to have committed suicide. The loss of three
legions and a large body of auxiliaries greatly affected the Emperor,
now a man of over seventy. For many months he wore signs of mourning,
and we are told that at times in his restless anxiety he beat his head
upon the door, crying, “Varus, give me back my legions!” Perhaps this is
the picturesque imagination of anecdote mongers. Though alarmed for the
possible consequences both at home and in the provinces, he acted with
spirit and energy. He ordered the urban pickets to be carefully posted,
suspended all changes in provincial governments, and held a levy of
citizen soldiers, enforcing by threats and punishment the duty of giving
in the names. For some time past service in the army had been regarded as
a profession sufficiently attractive to draw volunteers, without having
recourse to the legal right of conscription. But a sudden emergency
like this seems to have found men apathetic or disinclined, and he had
to resort to the old methods. He thought it necessary also to get rid
for a time of Gauls or Germans who were serving in the city cohorts or
residing in Rome. Tiberius, on the news of the disaster, hurried from
his Pannonian quarters to Rome, and was appointed to the Rhine command,
to which he went early in A.D. 10. The danger most to be feared was
that the victorious Germans would at once cross the Rhine. But this had
been averted partly because the Marcomanni had declined to join the
insurrection, even when Arminius sent the head of Varus to their chief,
Marobudus, and partly by the fact that the rebellious Germans themselves
wasted time in blockading Aliso, the fort erected by Drusus on the Lippe,
which was obstinately defended by its garrison under Lucius Cædicius. It
proved to be the Ladysmith of the German war, for the Germans, fearing to
leave it on their rear, missed the opportunity of attacking the camps on
the Rhine before they could be reinforced. The brave garrison, when their
provisions were exhausted, escaped on a dark night and reached Castra
Vetera in safety. Still, the result of the rising was to free Germany
beyond the Rhine. When Tiberius arrived to take the command in A.D. 10,
he spent the first year in strengthening the forts along that river; and
though in A.D. 11 he moved his summer camp beyond it, he never went far,
or apparently engaged in any warlike operations then or in A.D. 12. In
the next year he returned to Rome and was succeeded in the command by his
nephew, Germanicus. The forward movements of this young prince belong to
the next reign, but Tiberius no doubt learnt now what a few years later
induced him to recall Germanicus and be content with the frontier of the
Rhine.

[Sidenote: Administrative reforms. The post.]

The life of Augustus was now near its close, and there are no more
military enterprises to record. He had never commanded in the field
since the Cantabrian war of B.C. 25; but he had taken part in the most
important wars by moving to within such a distance of the seat of war as
to hear news quickly and to superintend the despatch of provisions and
reinforcements. He was probably more usefully employed in this way, and
was enabled to see, by personal observation, the needs of the provinces
and the best methods of remedying abuses and promoting prosperity. In
the course of his reign he is said to have visited every province except
Sardinia and Africa, and hardly any is without some trace of his activity
and liberality in the way of roads, bridges, or public buildings. He
was anxious that all, however distant, should feel in touch with the
central authority at Rome. Among other means to promote this was the
establishment or improvement of an imperial post which should reach the
most distant dependencies.

We must not think of this as being like the modern postal service—meant
for the general use of the public. It was purely official. Just as the
main purpose of the great roads was to facilitate the rapid movement
of armies and officials, so the post was a contrivance to expedite
official despatches, to convey the Emperor’s orders to remotest parts
of the Empire, and to carry back news and warnings to the government
at home. Along the great roads in Italy and the provinces there had
long been posting houses where relays of horses, mules, or carriages
could be obtained, but there was never what we should call a postal
service for the transmission of private letters. Rich men kept slaves
for this purpose (_tabellarii_), the magistrates had official messengers
(_statores_), and the companies of _publicani_ had their regular service
of carriers. Private people could, as a favour, get their letters
occasionally conveyed by some of these; and it was considered a proper
act of politeness at Rome when despatching a slave with letters to
distant places, to send round to one’s friends to know whether they
wished to send any by him. Again, governors of provinces under the
republic had arranged with certain scribes in Rome to copy out the
_diurna acta_ and transmit them by slaves or paid messengers. But for
official purposes Augustus arranged a number of stations along the great
roads with men, horses, and carriages, to convey to and from Rome all the
news that it was needful for the government to know or all orders that
emanated from the Emperor.[268] Private persons would have no right to
use these public servants or conveyances; but no doubt the organisation
for the public service facilitated the transmission of private
correspondence also.

This actual and material tightening of the bond which united distant
parts of the Empire with the central government went side by side with
the moral effect of the change in the position of the governors. No
longer permitted to make what profit they could from excessive exactions,
or percentages allowed by usage though not by law, they all received a
fixed salary, as did the lesser officials; and though extortion was still
occasionally heard of, the provinces knew that they had a rapid means of
appealing to the Emperor and a fair certainty of redress.

[Sidenote: The army under one commander-in-chief.]

Another change that made at first for unity, though it afterwards had
the contrary effect, concerned the army. In the time of the republic
there was in theory no one standing army. There were many armies, all
of which took the military oath to their respective commanders. Now the
military oath was taken by all to one man—the Emperor. The commanders of
legions were his _legati_. He regulated the pay, the years of service,
the retiring allowance for all alike. Each of the republican imperators
had a prætorian guard, generally consisting of auxiliary troops. Now
there was one prætorian guard, naturally stationed at Rome, and though
distinguished from the rest by increased pay and easier years of service,
it, as well as the _cohortes vigilum_, was under the same command. This
applies also to the fleet which was organised under Augustus chiefly
to protect the coast and clear the sea of pirates: the two principal
stations being at Misenum on the west, and Ravenna on the east coast,
with a third maintained for a time at Forum Iulii (Fréjus). The men
serving in these ships occupied the same position as citizen soldiers
or auxiliaries, and like them took the oath to one man—the Emperor.
But the very completeness of the organisation, it is right to notice
here, eventually made for disruption. Certain legions became constantly
attached to certain provinces, the auxiliaries serving with them being
as a rule recruited from the same provinces. The several branches of the
army thus came to feel an _esprit de corps_, and to regard themselves
as a separate entity with separate interests and claims. Consequently,
when in after-times the central authority was in dispute or in process
of change, the legions in the different provinces spoke and thought
of themselves as separate “armies,” capable of taking an independent
line and having a determining voice in deciding who should be their
Imperator. In those troublous times the provinces which had no military
establishment, or only a weak one, ceased to count for much, and had
to follow the strongest army near them.[269] For the present such
difficulties were not foreseen. Augustus was a strict disciplinarian,
and little was heard as yet of any serious insubordination. When it
did occur it was promptly punished. He disbanded the 10th legion for
misconduct, and exercised at times the full vigour of military punishment
for desertion of posts or lesser offences, and was careful in addressing
his troops not to lower his dignity by affectation of equality. He called
them “Soldiers!” not “Fellow-soldiers!” At the same time he kept up the
traditional exclusiveness of the legions, and seldom employed freedmen,
except as a kind of special constable in the city, and twice in times
of great distress, the Illyrian and German wars: even then they were
formed in separate cohorts, and armed in some way less complete than the
legionaries.

The same conservative attachment to the ancient superiority of Rome
made him chary of granting the citizenship either to individuals, or to
masses of soldiers, or to states. This was one of the points in which
his policy was opposite to that of Iulius. The latter by his large
grants of citizenship to soldiers, professional men and communities,
had helped to raise the number of citizens from about 450,000 in B.C.
70 to 4,063,000 (the number in the Census of B.C. 28). During the
forty-five years that remained to Augustus the number had only gone up
to 4,937,000 (the Census of A.D. 13). This is probably little more than
can be accounted for by the growth of population; so that extensions of
the franchise must have been insignificant. His idea was an empire, one
in its military obligations and in its subjection to one supreme head,
and yet not divorced from the original city state. Rome was to be the
imperial city, the seat of government; the Populus Romanus was to be the
inhabitants of Rome extended to the limits of Italy. There was to be a
sharp line of division between the ruling and the ruled. It was one of
those compromises that are without the elements of permanence. And yet
it established a sentiment that has lasted, and is a reason that even to
this day the centre of spiritual life to a large part of Europe is on the
banks of the Tiber. In material matters the extension of the citizenship
meant the gradual shifting of the centre of power, and when early in
the third century Caracalla, for purposes of taxation, extended the
citizenship to the whole Empire, though the Roman name and its historical
prestige remained, Rome itself became only one of a number of cities in
a widely spread empire, and politically by no means the most important.
Such a conception was far from the mind of Augustus. It would have seemed
to him to be more worthy of his rival Antony, who was for setting up a
new Rome in Alexandria.




CHAPTER XI

AUGUSTUS AND HIS WORSHIPPERS

    _O tutela præsens_
    _Italiæ dominæque Romæ._


[Sidenote: Popular feeling towards Augustus.]

After the settlement of the constitution in B.C. 23 Augustus was only
absent from Italy three times, from B.C. 22 to B.C. 19 in Sicily and the
East, from B.C. 16 to B.C. 13 in Gaul and Spain, and B.C. 9-10 in Gaul.
At the outbreak of the Pannonian and Dalmatian wars A.D. 6-9 he stayed
for some time at Ariminum. For the rest of the time he lived at Rome,
with the usual visits to his country houses, made by land or yacht.
His return to the city after any prolonged absence was celebrated with
every sign of rejoicing, with sacrifices, music, and a general holiday.
On his return from Gaul in B.C. 13 an altar was dedicated to _Fortuna
redux_.[270] Nor was this mere adulation. The people had come to look
upon him as the best guarantee of peace and security. The troubles of
the days preceding the civil wars, the street fighting and massacres,
the horrors of the civil war itself, were not forgotten: but his own
part in them was ignored or forgiven; it was only remembered that he had
put an end to them; that he had restored the ruinous city in unexampled
splendour; that it was owing to his liberality, or that of his friends
acting under his influence, that at Rome there were luxurious baths,
plentiful water, abundant food, streets free from robbers, help ready in
case of fire, and cheerful festivals nearly always in progress. It was
thanks to him that the roads in Italy were not beset by brigands, that
the corn-ships from Egypt crowded the harbour of Puteoli unmolested by
pirates on their course,[271] that not only the dreaded Parthian, but
princes from the ends of the earth were sending embassies desiring the
friendship of Rome. At the least sign of the old disorders they clamoured
for his return and besought him to become Dictator, director of the corn
trade, perpetual guardian of morals, anything, convinced that under his
absolute rule there would be peace, plenty, and security. Horace exactly
represents this feeling when he addresses Augustus in his absence in
Gaul: “Oh scion of the gracious gods, oh best guardian of the race of
Romulus ... return! Your country calls for you with vows and prayer ...
for when you are here the ox plods up and down the fields in safety;
Ceres and bounteous blessing cheer our farms; our sailors speed o’er seas
that know no fear of pirates; credit is unimpaired; no foul adulteries
stain the home; punishment follows hard on crime.... Who fears Parthian,
Scythian, German, or Spaniard with Cæsar safe? Each man closes a day of
peace on his native hills, trains his vines to the widowed trees, and
home returning, light of heart, quaffs his wine and ends the feast with
blessings on thee as a god indeed.”[272]

[Sidenote: The worship of Augustus.]

These feelings found expression in a form which in our day is apt
to appear, according to our temperament, ridiculous or profane. In
plain terms this was to treat Augustus as divine, a god on earth. The
various expressions of Horace[273] may perhaps be put down to poetical
exaggeration or conventional compliment, though there is a real meaning
at their back; but though Augustus refused to allow temples and altars
to himself in Rome and Italy,[274] and even ordered certain silver
statuettes to be melted down, the evidence of inscriptions makes it
certain that the cult began in his lifetime in several places, as at
Pompeii, Puteoli, Cumæ in Campania, and in other parts of Italy.[275]
In Rome itself, when Augustus reorganised the _vici_, the old worship
of the _Lares Compitales_ at some consecrated spot in each _vicus_
or “parish” was restored, but they were commonly spoken of as _Lares
Augusti_, and the _Genius Augusti_ was associated with them. It is this
fact that, to a certain extent, explains and renders less irrational an
attitude of mind which we are apt to dismiss as merely absurd. Each man
had a _Genius_—a deity to whom he was a particular care. We speak of a
man’s “mission,” implying by the word itself some external and directing
power, probably divine. The step is not a long one which identifies the
man and his genius, especially when his mission seems to be to bring
us peace and prosperity. “Oh Melibæus, ’twas a god that wrought this
ease for us!” exclaims the countryman in Vergil, who had got back his
lands. This confusion between the inspirer and the inspired, between the
mission and the man, was everywhere apparent. Among the statues in the
temples, and in the sacred hymns and other acts of worship, the figure
or the name of Augustus was associated with those of the gods in a way
that admitted, indeed, of a distinction being drawn between a memorial
to an almost divine man and an act of devotion to a god, but often
obscured that distinction for ordinary folk. When we dedicate a church
to a saint, or “to the glory of God and in memory of So-and-so,” the
distinction is of course clear, but the confusion which has from time to
