to surrender his winnings, and sometimes he supplied each member of the
party with a sum of money beforehand with which to make their stakes. But
games of chance had a fascination for him at all times of his life, and
his real gambling was not confined to festival days. He made no secret
of it, and we hear nothing of any great loss or gain. Social life at
Rome began early in the day, visitors at a levee would arrive soon after
daybreak, and a magistrate would sometimes have to be up immediately
after midnight, to take omens or perform some other religious rite. But
as Augustus worked late at night, and was not a good sleeper, early
rising was painful to him, and resulted in his falling fast asleep in
his sedan. If any of these night duties became imperative he took the
precaution of sleeping in some lodging near the place. But his normal
habit was to work up to noon, then after the light luncheon or prandium,
often consisting of bread and a few grapes, to sleep for a short time
fully dressed. Having finished the morning’s work and bath, dinner (cena)
would come between 3 and 4, though busy men like the Emperor often pushed
it on to 6 or 7; after dinner he went to his study, and there finished
off what was left of the day’s work, his memoranda and accounts, sitting
or reclining on his couch far into the night. The amount of work which
he must have bestowed upon his official business is shewn by the state
of readiness and completeness in which the various schedules of the
finances of the Empire and the army, and the book of political maxims
were found at his death. In early youth he had dabbled in literature,
and composed a tragedy in the Greek fashion called “Ajax”; but coming
in later years to estimate its value more truly he destroyed it, and
when some friend or flatterer inquired for it, he said, “Ajax has fallen
on his own sponge.”[285] He composed also memoirs of his own life, but
they were interrupted by his serious illness after the Spanish War (B.C.
25-3), and never resumed. They were used by Suetonius and other writers,
as well as collections of his letters, edicts, and speeches, but have not
been preserved. Only one of his epigrams has survived, of which I shall
speak hereafter. These excursions into literature, never very serious,
seem to have ceased as he got on in life. In the third book of his _Odes_
(written between B.C. 30-25), Horace tells the Muses that “they afford a
recreation to high Cæsar when he has put his troops into winter quarters
and seeks a rest from toil,”[286] but in the fourth book (B.C. 13-12)
it is the statesman, the conqueror, and reformer that he addresses, not
the man of letters. The Epistle addressed to Augustus in B.C. 12, though
it deals with literary criticism and explicitly supports the Emperor’s
well-known dislike of being the theme of inferior writers, while it
dwells upon his numerous employments and warmly compliments him on his
successful achievements, contains no word or hint of his authorship.[287]
The principate was a most laborious profession, absorbing all his
energies and occupying all his time, and though he might enjoy the
company of literary men, despatches, edicts, and state papers would now
be the limit of his literary ambition.

The heavy work of his lofty position was performed under painful
conditions of health. Besides at least four serious illnesses[288]
of which we hear, he was subject to periodical complaints, generally
recurring at the beginning of spring and autumn. Soon after B.C. 30 he
gave up the martial exercises of the Campus, then the less fatiguing
ball games, and finally confined himself to getting out of his sedan to
take short runs or walks. As he grew old his only outdoor amusements
(except yachting) seem to have been fishing and playing games with little
children.

In the last years of his life he gave up going into Roman society.
In the earlier part of his principate he dined out freely, and not
always in select company. He seems to have been rather inclined to the
vulgar millionaire, perhaps because he could reckon on contributions to
the public objects which he had at heart. He did not expect splendid
entertainments, and was content with the wine of the district, still he
did not like being treated with too little ceremony. To one man who gave
him a dinner ostentatiously plain and common, he remarked on leaving—“I
did not know that I was such an intimate friend of yours.” At times,
too, he had occasion to assume the Emperor with some of these _nouveaux
riches_, as in the celebrated case of Vedius Pollio. This man had a
stewpond of lampreys, which he fed with flesh. When he was entertaining
Augustus on one occasion the cup-bearer dropped a valuable crystal
cup, and his master ordered him at once to be thrown to the lampreys.
Augustus tried to beg him off, but when Pollio refused, he ceased to
entreat; assuming imperial airs he ordered all the cups of the same
sort in the house, and all others of value, to be brought into the room
and broken. Licinius, the grasping procurator of Gaul, was another of
these rich vulgar people, with whom Augustus was somewhat too intimate,
and expected in return for that honour large contributions to his
works. On one occasion he even took the liberty of altering the figure
in the promissory note sent by him so as to double the sum. Licinius
said nothing, but on the next occasion he sent a note thus expressed:
“I promise towards the expense of the new work—whatever your Highness
pleases.”

Wit is seldom kind, and some of the retorts attributed to him are not
always exceptions to the rule. To a humpbacked advocate pleading before
him, and often repeating the expression, “If you think I am wrong in
any way, pray set me straight,” he said, “I can give you some advice,
but I can’t set you _straight_.” To an officer who made rather too
much fuss about his services, and kept pointing to an ugly scar on his
forehead, he said, “When you run away you shouldn’t look behind you.”
More good-natured are the following. To a young prefect who was being
sent home from camp for misbehaviour, and who exclaimed, “How can I go
home? What am I to say to my father?” he replied, “Tell him that you did
not like me.” To another who was being cashiered, and pleaded to have
the usual good-service pension, that people might think he had left the
service in the usual way, he said, “Well, give out that you have received
the money; I won’t say that I haven’t paid it.”

Though affable to all, and neither an unkind nor unreasonable master to
his slaves, or patron to his freedmen, he was enough a man of his age not
to hesitate to inflict cruel punishment for certain offences. A secretary
who had taken a bribe to disclose some confidential paper, he ordered to
have his legs broken. A favourite freedman was forced to commit suicide
when detected in intrigues with Roman married ladies. He ordered the
personal servants of his grandson Caius, who had taken advantage of his
illness and death to enrich themselves in the province of Syria, to be
thrown into the sea with weights attached to their feet.

To those who had been his friends there is hardly any instance of extreme
severity after the end of the civil wars. It is possible that Muræna
died before trial, though his fellow-conspirator was put to death.
Cornelius Gallus, the first prefectus of Egypt, committed suicide rather
than confront the accusations brought against him and the evident animus
of the Senate; but Augustus did not wish it, and exclaimed with tears in
his eyes that it was hard that he should be the only man who might not be
angry with his friends without the matter going farther than he intended.
The coldness that arose between him and his ministers Agrippa and Mæcenas
was only temporary and never very grave. He deeply deplored their loss
at their death. We shall have to discuss his conduct to his daughter and
granddaughter and their paramours in another chapter. But neither in
regard to these persons nor the conspirators against his life did he ever
act in a way that his contemporaries would think cruel.

These anecdotes of Augustus do not suggest a very heroic figure, very
quick wit, or great warmth of heart. They rather indicate what I conceive
to be the truer picture, a cool and cautious character, not unkindly
and not without a sense of humour; but at the same time as inevitable
and unmoved by pity or remorse as nature herself. No one accuses him of
having neglected or hurried any task that it was his duty to perform.
But neither friend, relation, nor minister ever really influenced him.
He issues orders, and they all obey instinctively, without remonstrance,
and generally with success. He is providence to them all. Everything
succeeds under his hands. He is no soldier, though he knows one when he
sees him, but all the nations of the earth seek his friendship. Till the
last decade of his life no serious reverse befel his armies; at home all
opposition melted away, as the difficulties in a road or course disappear
before a skilful driver or steerer. He is not godlike, but there is an
air of calm success about him which swayed men’s wills and awakened their
reverence.




CHAPTER XII

THE REFORMER AND LEGISLATOR

    _Quid leges sine moribus_
    _vanæ proficiunt?_


[Sidenote: The earliest reforms in the Empire.]

The activity of Augustus as reformer in the city and Italy, and to a
great extent in the provinces also, was subsequent to the settlement of
his constitutional position in B.C. 23, after which date changes in it
were generally consequential, and in matters of detail. But it began
long before. In B.C. 36 he had taken effective measures to suppress the
brigandage which had pushed its audacity nearly up to the very gates
of Rome. In B.C. 34-3 Agrippa, under his influence, had started the
improvement in the water supply of Rome by restoring the Aqua Marcia;
had cleansed and enlarged the cloacæ, repaired the streets, and begun
many important buildings. In B.C. 31 we have evidence that Augustus
was turning his attention to the details of administration in the
provinces,[289] and in the next year, in his resettlement of Asia, he
restored to Samos, Ephesus, Pergamus, and the Troad, works of art which
Antony had taken from them to bestow upon Cleopatra.[290] In B.C. 28,
measures of relief were adopted for state debtors, and a term fixed
beyond which those who were in actual possession of properties could not
be disturbed by legal proceedings.

[Illustration: AUGUSTUS AS SENATOR.

_Photographed from the Statue in the Uffizi Gallery, Florence._

_To face page 212._]

[Sidenote: The roads and police patrols, B.C. 27.]

The first need of the country was security. How difficult this had long
been to maintain, and how ill the senatorial government at the end of the
Republic had been able to cope with the evil is shewn by the fact that
remnants of the bands of Spartacus and Catiline were in B.C. 61 still
infesting the district of Thurii. In spite of the repressive measures
of B.C. 36, which seem to have been successful as far as the immediate
neighbourhood of Rome was concerned, at the end of the civil war armed
bands still openly appeared in various parts of Italy, seized and carried
off travellers, confined them in the slave-barracks, or _ergastula_,
or put them to ransom. These _ergastula_ were originally slave-prisons
used for keeping refractory slaves, who worked during the day in chains,
and were shut up in separate cells at night, often underground or only
lighted by windows high up and out of reach of the inmates. In some
parts of Italy—chiefly the north—they were not known, and chained slaves
were not employed; but in other parts they were numerous, and afforded
convenient hiding-places. The chief abuse connected with them was that
men properly free could be carried off and concealed in them as though
they were slaves, while they afforded a leader in rebellion convenient
sources from which to draw recruits; the miserable inmates being only
too ready to join any one who gave them a hope of freedom and release
from those horrible dens. Accordingly a review of the _ergastula_ is
constantly heard of, till they were finally abolished by Hadrian. Among
the measures for the suppression of brigandage now taken was a visitation
of these places. It was not done in mercy to the slaves. Augustus, though
he treated his own servants with kindness, took the sternest Roman view
of the absolute power of a master, and boasts that after the war with
Sextus Pompeius he handed over 30,000 slaves—who had been serving with
the enemy—to their masters “to be punished.”[291] When we remember what
the “punishment” of a Roman slave meant, it is difficult to think without
horror of the sum total of human misery which this implies.

[Sidenote: The great roads of Italy secured.]

A more effective and permanent measure, however, was to secure the
roads and make them fit for rapid military movements. A system of road
commissions (_curæ viarum_) was started in B.C. 27, commissioners
(_curatores_) being appointed to superintend each of the great roads
leading from Rome to various parts of Italy. The duty at first was
usually imposed upon men who had enjoyed triumphs, and Augustus himself,
after his triple triumph, undertook the _via Flaminia_, the great north
road from Rome to Ariminum on the Adriatic, from which place other roads
branched off through the valley of the Po, and to the Alpine passes. The
pavement of the road was relaid, the bridges repaired, and the completion
of the work was commemorated by the still existing arch at Rimini, with
its partially surviving inscription.[292] For greater safety, also,
military pickets were stationed at convenient points along the roads,
which put a stop to brigandage.

In close connection with the roads were the twenty-eight military
colonies established by Augustus in Italy. Of these seven were along the
line of the Flaminia, or near it; one of them (Bononia) was the point
where the main roads to Rome converge. Others guarded the entrances to
the Alpine passes, or the road through Venetia to Istria—which Augustus
included in Italy—while another group protected the main roads through
Campania. Thus these colonies were not only centres of loyalty to the
Empire, but served to keep open the great routes. The object of the
division of Italy into eleven regions, the exact date of which is not
known, was probably for the purpose of the census, and the taxation
which was connected with it, but it was also for other administrative
purposes, as for the regulation of the military service of the young
men in each of them.[293] The regions followed the natural divisions of
the country and of nationalities, but the importance of the roads in
connection with them is shown by the fact that before long they became
known in many cases by the name of the chief road that traversed them,
as Æmilia, Flaminia, and others. What Augustus was doing for Italy his
legates under his authority were doing for the most important provinces.
Great roads—_viæ Augustæ_—were being laid everywhere. We have evidence of
them from inscribed tablets in Dalmatia, Pisidia, and Cilicia, Bætica,
Northern Spain, Gallia Narbonensis, and elsewhere.[294] These works
went on throughout his reign, but in B.C. 20 he commemorated his formal
appointment as head commissioner of all roads by placing a pillar covered
with gilded bronze in the forum near the temple of Saturn, with the
distances of all the chief places along the great roads from one of the
thirty-seven city gates from which these roads branch out. The base of
this _milliarium aureum_ is still in its place.

[Sidenote: The collegia.]

Another source of mischief were the _collegia_, or guilds. Under cover
of promoting the interests of certain trades and professions these
guilds were used, or were believed to be used, for all kinds of illegal
purposes. Some of them were of great antiquity, but they had come to
be so often misused for political terrorism (especially the _collegia
opificum_) that the Senate had suppressed many of them in B.C. 63. But
Clodius shortly afterwards got a law passed authorising their meetings,
and he employed them freely for promoting his own riotous proceedings.
Iulius Cæsar had dissolved all except the most ancient and respectable,
but during the civil wars they seem to have revived. Under a law passed
in B.C. 22 Augustus held a visitation of them. Some were dissolved and
some reformed, and a licence was henceforth required from Senate and
Emperor for their meetings.

[Sidenote: Feeding the city.]

In the city itself the first need was food. It depended very largely on
imported corn. Again and again we hear of dearth and famine prices at
Rome. The people, often, no doubt, rightly, believed that this dearness
of provisions arose from artificial causes. When Sextus Pompeius and
his confederates were scouring the seas and pouncing upon corn-ships
the cause was clear enough, and the gratitude to Augustus for crushing
him was very natural. But even when there was no such evident danger
great distress was often caused by sudden rise of prices. The idea
had always been in such times to appoint some powerful man _præfectus
annonæ_, with a naval force enabling him to secure that the corn fleets
should have free passage to Italy, should be able to unload their
cargoes without difficulty, and dispose of them at a moderate price. A
well-known instance of this was the appointment of Pompey in B.C. 57.
But in less troublous times a separate commissioner was appointed to
watch the several places of corn export, Sicily, Sardinia, and Africa.
These were not posts of very great dignity, and Brutus and Cassius in
B.C. 44 looked upon their nomination to them as a kind of insult. But
besides the dangers of the sea and of pirates certain merchants had hit
upon means—practised long before at Athens—of artificially raising the
price. They made what we should call “a corner” in corn. Either they
bought it up and kept it back from the market, or they contrived various
ways of delaying the ships and producing a panic among the dealers. As
in all difficulties, the people looked to Augustus for help, and in
B.C. 22 begged him to accept the office of _præfectus annonæ_, “chief
commissioner of the corn market.” While declining the dictatorship
offered him at the same time with passionate vehemence, he accepted this
commissionership; and the law which he caused to be passed now or some
