time later on shews how necessary some State interference was. By this
law penalties were inflicted on any one “who did anything to hinder the
corn supply, or entered into any combination with the object of raising
its price; or who hindered the sailing of a corn-ship, or did anything of
_malice propense_ whereby its voyage was delayed.”[295]

[Sidenote: Distribution of corn free or below market value.]

But besides a free and unmolested corn market, the Roman populace had
long come to look for another means of support—a distribution of corn
either altogether free or considerably below the market price. Detached
instances of this practice occur in the earlier history of Rome, the corn
sometimes coming as a present from some foreign sovereign, sometimes
being distributed by private liberality. It had always been objected to
by the wiser part of the Senate, and had laid the donors open to the
charge of trying to establish a tyranny. It was reserved for the tribune
Gaius Gracchus to make it into a system (B.C. 122). Since his time it had
been submitted to as a matter of course by nearly all magistrates. Sulla,
indeed, seems to have suspended it for a time, but the first measure of
the counter revolution that followed his death was to re-establish it.
Iulius Cæsar had restricted it to citizens below a certain census, but
had not the courage to abolish it. It was, indeed, a kind of poor-law
relief, but of the worst possible sort. It not only induced a number of
idle and useless people to prefer the chances of city life to labour
in the country, but it unnaturally depressed the price of corn, and
therefore discouraged the Italian farmer, already nearly ruined by the
competition of foreign corn; it exhausted the treasury, and, after all,
did not relieve the poor. Livy regards it as one of the causes which
denuded Italy of free cultivators, and left all the work to slaves.
Cicero always denounced it on much the same grounds, and Appian points
out how it brought the indigent, careless, and idle flocking into the
city.[296] The system, moreover, was open to gross abuses, slaves being
manumitted that they might take their share, under contract to transfer
it to their late masters. Augustus saw that by these distributions
injustice was done both to farmers and merchants, and that agriculture
in Italy was being depressed by it. He says in his memoirs[297] that
he had at one time almost resolved to put a stop to the practice, but
refrained from doing so because he felt sure that the necessity of
courting the favour of the populace would induce his successors to
restore it. However unsound this reasoning may be, it would no doubt have
been an heroic measure for one in his position to have carried out the
half-formed resolution. As a matter of fact, his distributions were on a
large scale, and in times of distress were entirely gratis. _Tesseræ_, or
tickets, entitling the holders to a certain amount of corn or money, were
distributed again and again. The value of the corn tickets was generally
supplied from the _fiscus_ or his private revenue; but that after all was
only a question of accounts, it did not affect the economical or moral
results in any way.

[Sidenote: State loans.]

A better economical measure was a system of State loans. Immediately
after the end of the civil war the transference to the Roman treasury of
the enormous wealth in money and jewels of the Ptolemies at Alexandria
caused the price of money to go down and the money value of landed
property consequently to go up. For a time at least the common rate of
interest sank from 12 to 4 per cent. Augustus took advantage of this
state of things to relieve landowners who were in difficulties, by
lending them money free of interest, if they could show property of
double the value as security for repayment.

[Sidenote: The Tiber.]

There were other reforms equally beneficial. Among the many _curæ_
(commissions) which he established was one for superintending public
works, which would thus not depend on private munificence; another of the
streets; of the water supply; and, above all, of the Tiber. Rome was,
as it still is, extremely subject to floods. Quite recently there were
five or six feet of water in the Pantheon, and in B.C. 27 the rise of
the Tiber was so serious that the lower parts of the city were covered,
and the augurs declared it to be an omen of the universal prevalence
of the power of the new _princeps_. In B.C. 23 it swept away the _pons
Sublicius_.[298] He could not of course prevent these floods, but he
gave some relief by dredging and widening the river-bed, which was
choked with rubbish and narrowed by encroachments. The commission thus
established remained an important one for many generations, but in B.C. 8
he superintended the business himself.

[Sidenote: Fire brigades.]

A danger at Rome, more frequent and no less formidable than flood, was
fire. So frequent were fires that the most stringent laws had been passed
against arson, which it seems was even punishable by burning alive. In
B.C. 23 Augustus formed a kind of fire brigade of public slaves under
the control of the curule-ædiles. But the old magistracies were no
longer objects of desire, and it was difficult to get men of energy to
fill them, a state of things which was one of the chief blots in the new
imperial system. At any rate in this case they were not found efficient,
and in the later years of his reign (A.D. 6), a new brigade in four
divisions was formed of freedmen with an equestrian præfect, who turned
out to be so effective that they became regularly established.

[Sidenote: The Sibylline Books and Sacred Colleges.]

Another part in the scheme of Augustus for the reconstruction of society
was to revive the influence of the Sacred Colleges and brotherhoods,
and to renew the ceremonies with which they were connected. One method
of doing this was to become a member of them all himself, much as
the king of England is sovereign of all the Orders. Thus according
to the _Monumentum_ (ch. 7) he was pontifex, augur, quindecemvir for
religious rites, septemvir of the Epulones, an Arval brother, a fetial
and a sodalis Titius. Nor was he only an honorary or idle member. He
attended their meetings and joined in their business, and took part in
whatever rites they were intended to perform. Thus his membership of the
Arval brethren is recorded in the still existing _acta_; as a fetial
he proclaimed war against Cleopatra. The _sodales Titii_, a college
of priests of immemorial antiquity, had almost disappeared until the
entrance of Augustus into their college revived them and their ritual.
He not only joined these colleges, but revived and even increased their
endowments,[299] and, above all, those of the six Vestal Virgins, to whom
he presented the _regia_, once the official residence of the Pontifex
Maximus, and an estate at Lanuvium. The restoration of the College of
Luperci, which had celebrated on the 15th of February the old ceremony of
“beating the bounds” almost from the foundation of the city, was more or
less a political matter. It had gone out of fashion, and its ceremonies
had got to be looked upon as undignified. Iulius Cæsar had revived and
re-endowed them. The Senate for that very reason in the reaction after
his death had deprived them of these endowments, which Augustus now
restored. We have already noticed his renewal of the _augurium salutis_,
the old ceremonial prayer at the beginning of the year that could only be
offered in time of peace. He also induced some one to accept the office
of _flamen Dialis_ in B.C. 11, after it had been vacant since B.C. 87,
because the restrictions under which its holder laboured were so numerous
and tiresome that in spite of its dignity—its seat in the Senate and
curule chair and lictor—no one would accept it. He took pains again
to restore the Sibylline Books to their old place of importance. The
originals were lost in the fire of B.C. 82, and a commission had at once
been issued to collect others from towns in Greece and Greek Italy. But
some of them were getting illegible from age, and some were of doubtful
authenticity, and consequently all kinds of prophetic verses got into
circulation, giving rise at times to undesirable rumours and panics.
Augustus in B.C. 18 ordered them to be re-copied and edited, and the
authorised edition was then deposited in his new temple of Apollo on the
Palatine, and continued to be consulted till late in the third century.
After an attempt by Iulian to revive its authority it was finally burnt
by Stilicho about A.D. 400.

[Sidenote: Pontifex Maximus.]

As one of the quindecemvirs Augustus had charge of these books, but
he formally took the official headship of Roman religion by becoming
Pontifex Maximus. He was elected and ordained to that office in March
B.C. 12. The people had wished him to take it in B.C. 30, but he would
not violate what was a traditional and sacred rule that the office was
lifelong, and though Lepidus was degraded from the triumvirate in B.C.
36, he was still Pontifex Maximus. It is true that he was not allowed to
do any of the duties, or only those of the most formal kind, but still
he had the office. The ground for asking Augustus to take it was that
the election of Lepidus had been irregular; he had managed to get put in
during the confusion following the assassination of Cæsar, and therefore
might be deposed. Augustus however takes credit for his scrupulous
observance of a religious rule, and was particularly gratified by the
crowds of people who came up to vote for him, a sort of ecclesiastical
coronation.[300]

[Sidenote: The _ludi sæculares_, May 31-June 2, B.C. 17.]

In B.C. 17 he gave an emphasis to some of these religious revivals by
celebrating the _ludi sæculares_, the centenary of the city, in virtue
of some verses found in this Sibylline volume. We need not trouble
ourselves as to whether his calculation of the year was a right one
(the _sæculum_ was really 110 years), it is enough to note that they
were meant, like a centenary of a college or university, to call out
patriotic and loyal feelings which should embrace both the country and
the country’s religion. They are made interesting to us by the fact
that Horace—always ready to further his master’s purposes—was selected
to write the Anthem or Ode to be sung by a chorus of twenty-seven boys
and twenty-seven girls. An inscription, found in 1871 in the bed of the
Tiber, gives the official program of this festival, and ends with the
words _Carmen composuit Q. Horatius Flaccus_.[301] The poet probably
had before him, when he wrote it, the general scheme of the festival,
which included solemn sacrifices and prayer to Iuno, Diana, Iupiter, and
Ilithyia. Augustus and Agrippa took the leading part in the religious
functions—as members of quindicemviri—and both repeated the prayers,
which in the case of all these deities invoked a blessing on the “Populus
Romanus Quiritium.” In short, everything was done to mark it as a
national festival, to make the Romans recall their glorious inheritance
and unique position, and at the same time to show that the _princeps_
represented that greatness before gods and men. Whatever else Augustus
may have thought of the national religion, he evidently regarded it as
the surest bond of national life, and the inclusion of a prayer to
Ilithyia, goddess of childbirth, joined with his contemporaneous attempt
to encourage marriage and the production of children (which the obedient
Horace echoes[302]), shews that he also connected that religion with
morality. The restoration of religion, in fact, in his mind, goes side
by side with the purification of morals. It is the practical statesman’s
view of religion as a necessary police force and perhaps something more.
Napoleon restored the Catholic Church in France with a similar sagacity,
and the people blessed him, as they did Augustus, for giving them back
_le bon Dieu_.

[Sidenote: The reformation of morals.]

But the state of things required in his judgment, not only a religious
revival, but more stringent laws. Horace again reflects his master’s
views in the making, before they find expression in act. The sixth ode
of the first book (written about B.C. 25) joins to the necessity of a
restoration of the temples and a return to religion a warning as to the
relaxation of morals, tracing the progress in vice of the young girl
and wife, with the shameful connivance of the interested husband, and
exclaims: “Not from such parents as these sprang the youth that dyed the
sea with Punic blood, and brake the might of Pyrrhus and great Antiochus
and Hannibal, scourge of God.” Again in the twenty-fourth ode of the
same book, also written about B.C. 25, he warmly urges a return to the
old morality, and promises immortality to the statesman who shall secure
it: “If there be one who would stay unnatural bloodshed and civic fury,
if there be one who seeks to have inscribed on his statue the title of
‘Father of the Cities,’ let him pluck up heart to curb licentiousness.
His shall be a name for the ages!” And when Augustus has acted on the
resolution, to the formation of which the poet was privy, he tells him
ten years later that by his presence family life is cleansed from its
foul stains, that he has curbed the licence of the age and recalled
the old morality.[303] This he would represent as the result of the
Emperor’s legislation, the _lex marita_ of the secular hymn.

It was after his return from the East in B.C. 19 that Augustus first
received censorial powers for five years. Whether this amounted to a
definite office—a _præfectura moribus_ or _regimen morum_, as Dio and
Suetonius assert—does not much matter. The experiment of appointing
censors in the ordinary way had been tried in B.C. 22 for the last time
and had not been successful, and the _censoria potestas_ now given to
Augustus practically put into his hands that control over the conduct
of private citizens which the censors had exercised by their power of
inflicting “ignominy” upon them. The ancient censorial stigma had been
applied to irregularities in almost every department of life, but it
depended on the will of the censors themselves, not on laws. Feeling now
directly responsible for the morals and general habits of the citizens he
began a series of legislative measures designed to suppress extravagance
and debauchery, and to encourage marriage and family life, which would
have permanent validity. He believed in externals, even trivial ones,
as indicating a growing laxity; making, for instance, a point of men
appearing in the forum and on official occasions in the old Roman toga.
The lighter and more comfortable _lacerna_ or _pallium_ was as abominable
in his eyes as a suit of flannels would seem to a martinet of to-day
in the Park or on parade.[304] Before all things the Romans were to be
national, in dress no less than in other respects.

[Sidenote: Sumptuary laws.]

But the failure which always attends such regulations was no less
inevitable in regard to the first of his new reforming measures, his
sumptuary laws, regulating the exact amount that it was legal to spend
on a _cena_ in ordinary days, on festivals, and at wedding feasts, or
the _repotia_ which the bridegroom gave on the afternoon following his
marriage. This was no new thing. It had been tried at various times
throughout Roman history. Beginning with a very ancient law regulating
the amount of silver plate each man might legally possess, the rent he
might pay for his house, and the provisions of the Twelve Tables, we have
laws in the third and second centuries B.C., limiting the cost of dress
and jewels for women, the number of guests that might be entertained at
banquets, and the amount that might be spent upon them. Sulla had also a
sumptuary law, among his other acts, of the same kind. But Iulius Cæsar
had gone farther than any one in B.C. 46. He had not only regulated the
cost of furniture and jewels, according to the rank of the owners, and
the amounts to be spent upon the table, but he had sent agents into
the provision markets, who seized all dainties beyond the legal price,
and even entered private houses and removed dishes from the table. Of
course such measures were not only annoying, they were ineffective
also. Directly he left Rome the rules were neglected. Our own Statute
Book has many laws of the same kind, which rapidly became dead letters.
Nearly the one and only permanent effect of the old sumptuary laws had
been to create a sentiment against large and crowded dinner parties as
vulgar.[305] Nor did Augustus succeed much better. Towards the end of his
reign he issued an edict extending the legal amount which might be spent
on banquets, hoping to secure some obedience to the law. But nothing
that we know of Roman life afterwards leads us to think that this form
of paternal government—though quite in harmony with Roman ideas—ever
attained its object. Human nature was stronger than political theory.

[Sidenote: The Iulian laws of marriage, adultery and divorce.]

Nor were the laws, carried about the same time,[306] on marriage,
divorce, and kindred subjects, much more effective. In part they
re-enacted rules which had always been acknowledged and always disobeyed,
and so far as they did not punish a crime, but endeavoured to enforce
marriage, they were continually resisted or effectually evaded.
They consisted of a series of enactments—whether we regard them as
separate laws or chapters in the same law—for restraining adultery and
libitinage, for regulating divorce, and for encouraging the marriage of
all ranks.[307] They were passed in B.C. 18-17, and were supplemented
by a law of A.D. 9, called the _lex Papia Poppæa_. The text of none of
them survives, and we have to trust to scattered notices in the later
legal writers. They may be roughly classed as restrictive, penal, and
beneficiary. In the first may be placed the regulation that no senator
or member of a senatorial family might marry a freed-woman, courtesan,
actress, or the daughter of an actor; though other men might marry a
freed-woman or even emancipate a slave in order to marry her. And under
the same head came the regulations as to divorce. The legal doctrine
appears to have been that marriage contracted with the old religious
ceremony called _confarreatio_ was indissoluble, except in the case of
the wife’s adultery, on whose condemnation to death the execution was
preceded by a solemn dissolution of the marriage or _diffareatio_. It was
also a common belief that no divorce had ever taken place at Rome until
that of Carvilius in B.C. 231. Yet the laws of the Twelve Tables (B.C.
450) contained provisions as to divorce, so that it had certainly been
known before; and perhaps the truth was that Carvilius was the first to
divorce his wife without any plea of adultery, in which case he would
have to give security for the repayment of her dowry. Since that time
the religious _confarreatio_ had become extremely rare. Both men and
women avoided an indissoluble tie. The fashion was to be married _sine
