manu_, that is, without the woman passing into the _manus_ or power of
her husband. She still remained subject to the _patria potestas_, or to
that of her guardian, or was _sui iuris_ according to her circumstances
at the time. Such marriages could be dissolved by either party, and
without charge of misconduct. Public opinion seems to have restrained
both men and women for some time from taking advantage of their freedom,
but its force steadily diminished, till towards the end of the republic
divorce became so common as to provoke little remark. It was an
arrangement—as in the case of Augustus and his family—governed almost
entirely by considerations of convenience or advantage, and generally
left all parties concerned on a friendly footing. This of course was
not always the case when the divorce was the result of misconduct, or
at least of misconduct on the wife’s part, nor even if it resulted
from incompatibility of temper or money disputes, which left a feeling
of soreness behind them. It was a system—however disastrous to family
life—too deeply rooted for Augustus to attempt to change it, even if
he had wished to do so. His law seems to have dealt only with certain
formalities and conditions of divorce—such as the necessity of having
witnesses, and in case of a charge of misconduct a kind of family council
or court of inquiry—not with the freedom of divorce itself, except that
in the case of a freed-woman, she was prevented from divorcing her
husband or marrying again without his consent. That, however, rested
on the idea of the rights of a patronus rather than on the sanctity of
marriage. Otherwise the law chiefly dealt with questions of property,
restraining the husband from alienating his wife’s estate without her
consent, and re-enacting (with what modifications we do not know) the
provisions for the repayment of dowry.

[Sidenote: Penalties (1) for adultery or seduction.]

The _penal_ enactments affected (1) those guilty of adultery or seduction
(_stuprum_), and (2) those who remained unmarried or without children.
In adultery both parties were punished by transportation (_deportatio
in insulam_) and a partial confiscation of property. A husband’s
unfaithfulness incurred no penalty except that he lost all claim to
retain any part of the wife’s dowry, even for the benefit of children.
But the old barbarous principle of the injured husband’s right to kill
both wife and paramour, if detected by himself, was retained, though
under certain conditions. If he allowed the guilty wife to remain with
him, he was bound to release the man; and if he connived at the adultery
for gain, he was subject to a fine. _Stuprum_ was formerly defined as
the forcible detention of a free woman for immoral purposes, and could
be punished by flogging or imprisonment. Under the Iulian law it was
extended to the seduction of an unmarried woman or a widow who had been
living chastely.

[Sidenote: (2) For remaining unmarried.]

The penalties upon those who remained unmarried between certain ages were
in the form of a direct tax or of certain disabilities. The former, under
the name of _uxorium_, was of great antiquity, and had been levied by
the censors of B.C. 404, but it was light and intermittent; the Iulian
law revived and increased it. The disabilities were that an unmarried
man between the legal ages could not take a legacy from a testator
not related to him within the sixth degree, unless he married within
a hundred days of being informed of the legacy. This was extended by
the _lex Papia Poppæa_ (A.D. 9) to the childless, who could only take
half any legacy from a testator unconnected with them within the sixth
degree. One child saved a man from coming under this law, three children
a freeborn woman, four a freed-woman. Again, a husband and wife who were
childless could only receive a tenth of a legacy left by one to the
other, though, if there were children by another marriage, a tenth was
added for each, or if they had had children who had died. For all alike
there were numerous exemptions founded on absence from home on public
service, age, or ill-health; and a certain time of grace (_vacatio_) was
given between the attainment of the legal age and the actual marriage, or
between two marriages, or after a divorce.

[Sidenote: Privileges to parents. The _ius trium liberorum_.]

The beneficiary clauses of the law were those which relieved married
men or women and men or women with children from these disabilities,
and gave them exemption from certain onerous public duties and special
places of honour in the theatres. The fathers of three children at Rome,
four in Italy, five in the provinces, had also certain preferences for
offices and employments and other honorary distinctions, such as taking
precedence of a colleague in the consulship. This was not a new idea, for
it had in one shape or another existed in many Greek states, and in B.C.
59 Iulius Cæsar had in his agrarian law given the preference to fathers
of three children in the distribution of land.

[Sidenote: Opposition to the law.]

The disabilities imposed on the unmarried were met with vehement
resistance, in consequence of which the clause was introduced giving
the three years’ grace between the attainment of the legal age and the
actual marriage. After the passing of the Papia Poppæa (A.D. 9) the
Emperor in the theatre or circus was received with loud shouts from the
equestrian seats demanding its repeal. He is said to have sent for the
children of Germanicus and held them up as an example for all to follow;
and he afterwards summoned two meetings of the equites, one of those
married, and the other of the single. To each he delivered a speech,
which Dio reports or invents. He pointed with dismay to the fact that the
first meeting was so much less numerous than the second. He commended
the married men for having done their duty to the State, but to the
unmarried he addressed a longer and more vehement appeal. He argued that
they were defeating the purpose of the Creator, were contributing to the
disappearance of the Roman race, which was being replaced by foreigners
necessarily admitted to the franchise in order to keep up the numbers of
the citizens; that he had only followed in his legislation the precedent
of ancient laws with increased penalties and rewards, and that while he
acknowledged that marriage was not without its troubles, yet that was
true of everything else, and they were compensated by other advantages
and the consciousness of duty done.[308]

But though the Emperor carried his point at the time and passed a law
which remained in force for more than three centuries, it did not really
benefit morality. It was constantly evaded by colourable marriages, often
with quite young children. “Men did not marry to have heirs, but in order
to become heirs,” it was said. And though Augustus attempted to prevent
this by an edict enacting that no betrothal was to count which was not
followed by a marriage within two years, other means of evading the law
were found which gave rise to the intrusion of spies and informers who
made their profit by thus violating the secrets of the family. Again,
the granting of the _ius trium liberorum_ became gradually a matter of
form, and the idea of the superiority of the married state necessarily
disappeared with the rise of certain Christian ideals. The law was
repealed by the sons of Constantine.

[Sidenote: The character of Augustus in view of this legislation.]

Though a line is often drawn between a man’s public and private
character, it still remains hard to reconcile the earnestness of Augustus
in pressing these laws and his severity in punishing offences of this
nature with the reports of his own personal habits. I have already
expressed my disbelief in the stories of his youthful immoralities.
Suetonius, who spares no emperor the inevitable chapter summing up his
sins of the flesh, asserts that not even his friends deny the intrigues
of his later years, but merely urge that they were conducted not for
the gratification of his passions, but for motives of policy, that he
might gain information of secret plots. He mentions no names and gives
no evidence; the only names that have come down are those mentioned
in Antony’s extraordinary letter justifying his own connection with
Cleopatra. Antony, however, could only have known Roman gossip at second
or third hand in Alexandria, and the whole tone of the letter is so
reckless and violently coarse that it goes for very little by way of
evidence. Dio indeed mentions the wife of Mæcenas. But his statements
do not hang together or amount to very much. In one place he tells us
that Augustus was annoyed with Mæcenas because the latter had told his
wife something as to measures being taken against her brother Murena. At
another he says that some gossips attributed his journey to Gaul in B.C.
16 to a wish to enjoy her society without exciting popular remark, “for
he was so much in love with her that he once made her dispute with Livia
as to the superiority in beauty.” Even if the gossip was worth anything,
this hardly looks like a secret intrigue. Nor is it a confirmation of
it that Mæcenas at his death left Augustus his heir. However, the fact
may nevertheless be so. Livia is said elsewhere by Dio to have explained
her lasting influence over Augustus by the fact that she was always
careful not to interfere in his affairs, and, while remaining strictly
chaste herself, always pretended not to know anything of his amours. If
Livia did say this, it would of course be a sufficiently strong proof of
the allegations against him. But such reported sayings rest ultimately
on gossip and tittle-tattle, and do not go for much. The story told
by Dio, and amplified by Zonaras, of Athenodorus of Tarsus getting
himself conveyed into his chamber in the covered sedan intended for
some mistress, and springing out of it sword in hand and then appealing
to Augustus as to whether he did not often run such risks, is not very
likely in itself, and at any rate must refer to the triumviral days. For
about B.C. 30 Athenodorus was sent back to govern Tarsus. The one epigram
by the hand of Augustus, which has been preserved by Martial,[309] is
undeniably outspoken and coarse, but it is the coarseness of disgust,
not of lubricity, and to my mind is evidence—so far as it may be called
so—for him rather than against him. If, however, all that Suetonius and
Dio allege against his middle life is true, we must still remember that
in the eyes of his contemporaries, and indeed in Roman society generally
from Cato downwards, such indulgence in itself was not reprehensible. It
entirely depended on circumstances, and whether other obligations—such
as friendship, public duty, family honour—were or were not violated.
From that point of view the only crime of Augustus would be in the case
of Terentia, wife of Mæcenas, if the tale is true. As among the other
emperors whose life Suetonius wrote, with the exception of Vespasian, the
character of Augustus stands out clear. One age cannot judge fairly of
another, and it is not seldom that we find ourselves at as great a loss
to reconcile theory and practice, as to account for lives such as those
of Augustus and Horace in conjunction with the legislation of the former
and the moral sentiments occasionally expressed by the latter.




CHAPTER XIII

LATER LIFE AND FAMILY TROUBLES

    _Edepol, Senectus, si nil quidquam_
    _aliud viti apportes tecum, cum_
    _advenis, unum id sat est quod diu_
    _vivendo multa quæ non volt videt._


[Sidenote: The situation in B.C. 20-17.]

After the restoration of the standards and prisoners from the Parthians
in B.C. 20, and when the peaceful settlement of the Eastern provinces
and subordinate kingdoms had been carried through or fairly started,
Augustus appears to have thought that the greater part of his life’s
work had been accomplished. The frontiers of the Empire had been settled
and secured. The Eastern provinces had been visited, necessary reforms
introduced, and great works of public utility set on foot. He wrote word
to the Senate that the Empire was sufficiently extensive, and that he had
no intention of adding to it by further annexations. He returned to Rome
the following year (B.C. 19) to find that the renewed trouble in Northern
Spain had been settled, or was on the point of being settled, by Agrippa.
He proposed to devote himself henceforth to internal reforms and the
superintendence of the peaceful improvements which he contemplated in the
provinces. He no doubt had in mind the necessity of a personal visitation
of distant parts of the Empire from time to time; but by associating
the able and trustworthy Agrippa with himself in the tribunician power
(B.C. 18) he might feel that he would always have a support in the
administration at home or abroad on which he could rely. It was at this
time, therefore, that the reforms and restorations were accomplished
which have been described in the last chapter, crowned by the national
festival, the _ludi sæculares_, in which he and Agrippa stood side by
side as mouthpieces of the whole people before the gods.

We have seen, however, how these peaceful hopes were disappointed.
Scarcely were the secular games over than news came of the serious
disturbances in Gaul, Pannonia, Dalmatia, and Thrace, which led to his
three years’ absence from Rome and his long residence in Gaul and Spain.
He had only returned to Rome from this absence little more than a year
when he lost Agrippa, who died in March, B.C. 12, and he was obliged
to fall back upon the support of Tiberius, as his two grandsons were
only eight and five years old respectively. It was in B.C. 11 that he
compelled him to divorce his wife, Vipsania, to whom he was devotedly
attached, and marry Iulia, left a widow by Agrippa. The change was
thoroughly distasteful to Tiberius. He loved Vipsania, and he had good
reason to suspect Iulia of at least levity. So strong were his feelings
for his divorced wife that means had to be taken to prevent the two
meeting, for on a chance _rencontre_ he was observed to follow her with
straining eyes and tears. The arrangement, indeed, was wholly the work
of Augustus, with a view to a possible failure in the succession (which
did actually occur), for by this time he had evidently imbibed the idea
of a dynasty, and of the necessity of having some one connected with
him to take his place, who would be regarded as a natural successor
by all classes of citizens. But it proved the origin of a sorrow and
mortification which did much to overcloud his later days.

[Illustration: JULIA, DAUGHTER OF AUGUSTUS.

_From the Bust in the Uffizi Gallery, Florence._

_To face page 234._

LIVIA, WIFE OF AUGUSTUS.

_From the Bust in the Uffizi Gallery, Florence._

_Page 274._]

[Sidenote: Iulia, b. B.C. 39; ob. A.D. 14.]

At first, we are told, the marriage seemed likely to be a happy one.
Iulia accompanied her husband on his campaigns in Dalmatia (B.C. 11-10),
or at any rate awaited him at Aquileia, where a child was born and
died. But from that time forward the breach between them was always
widening. Tiberius seems to have remembered certain passages that had
passed between them while she was still the wife of Agrippa, and she
regarded him as her social inferior, and wrote a violent complaint of
his character and habits to Augustus—supposed to have been composed for
her by her lover, Sempronius Gracchus, who paid for that service by his
life in the first year of the next reign; and when in B.C. 6 Tiberius
retired to Rhodes, his motive seems to have been as much to escape her
company as to avoid the awkwardness of his political position. Left
thus to her own devices in the midst of a corrupt society, she seems
soon to have outdone all former excesses. She was beautiful—except that
she early had grey hair—witty and wilful: so wilful and capricious that
Augustus used to say that he had “two fanciful daughters whom he was
obliged to put up with—the state and Iulia.” She drew round her all the
rich and extravagant youth. At the amphitheatre, on one occasion, some
one pointed out the contrast between the respectable elderly personages
who surrounded Livia and the wild youth who formed her own train. “Oh!
they will grow old along with me!” she replied. To a graver friend, who
suggested that she would do better to imitate the economical habits of
her father, she retorted: “He forgets that he is a Cæsar; I remember that
I am Cæsar’s daughter.” Once the Emperor entered the room while she was
at her toilet and noticed that her tire women had been plucking out her
grey hairs. He stayed chatting on all kinds of subjects, and insensibly
led the conversation to the subject of old age. “Which would you prefer?”
he asked, “to be grey or bald?” “Oh, grey,” she replied. “Then I wonder,”
said he, “that you let these women make you bald so soon.” She had at
times given him some unpleasant doubts as to her conduct. She came to
see him once dressed in a meretricious style, which she knew would vex
him. Next day she reappeared dressed with complete decorum. He had said
nothing the day before, but now exclaimed, “Isn’t this a style more
becoming to a daughter of Augustus?” “Oh,” said she, “I dressed to-day
for my father to see, yesterday for my husband.”

He had never liked her mixing in general society as a girl. She and
his granddaughters, who lived in his house, were trained to spend
their time in women’s work, spinning wool, and the like, and to have
no secret conversations or idle talk; and he once wrote to a young
noble who had called on her while staying at Baiæ that “he had taken
a great liberty.” But in spite of such seclusion she had developed a
considerable knowledge of and taste for literature, and her cheerful
good nature made her popular at court and in society. Her father watched
her career as a married woman, and from time to time gave her half-grave
and half-playful hints as to her extravagance in dress and the style of
people that surrounded her. But he does not seem to have entertained
serious suspicions. Meanwhile she is said by our authorities not only
to have been indulging in numerous intrigues, but to have violated all
