enjoyment.




CHAPTER XIV

THE LAST DAYS

    _Let the sound of those he fought for,_
    _And the feet of those he wrought for,_
    _Echo round his bones for evermore._


[Sidenote: The activities of the last years of Augustus, A.D. 8-14.]

The public and private troubles mentioned in the last chapter did not
break the spirit or paralyse the energies of the aged Emperor, or prevent
him from taking a strenuous part in the administration of the Empire.
The last eight years of his life were full of stir and movement, though
our meagre authorities give us few details. He actively supported the
campaigns of Tiberius and Germanicus; he was introducing reforms in
Gaul;[311] he was pushing on improvements in the East, and founding a
series of colonies in Pisidia as a defence against the predatory mountain
tribes; he was directing a census of the whole Empire; he was emending
his marriage laws by the farther enactments contained in the _lex Papia
Poppæa_, which he supported by energetic speeches; he was elaborating a
great financial scheme; he was personally attending to the embankment of
the Tiber; he was reforming the city police and fire brigades; and when
the Varian disaster occurred we have seen with what energy he acted, how
he enforced the law of military service and despatched reinforcements to
the Rhine, while he cleared the city of dangerous elements and provided
against possible movements in the provinces. Though now seventy-two
years old he shewed no sign of senility in heart; and as it was said
that at every stage of his life he had the beauty appropriate to it, so
in spirit, courage, and prudence he seems always to have answered to any
strain to which he was submitted.

[Sidenote: Financial measures of Augustus.]

To understand the financial changes of these years it is necessary to
recall a few broad facts as to the revenue of the Empire. It arose from
(1) Italy, (2) the provinces. In Italy the sources of revenue were the
customs (_portoria_), the rent of public land, the _vicesima_ or 5 per
cent. on the value of manumitted slaves. From the time that it became
the habit to pay the soldiers, a _tributum_ or property tax had been
raised, at first as a temporary measure, or even as a loan, but gradually
as a regular thing. Since the Macedonian wars, however, B.C. 167, this
_tributum_ had not been levied: the additional wealth acquired by the new
conquests being sufficient. It does not appear that the _tributum_ was
abolished by law, and indeed for a short time it was reimposed by the
Triumvirs, though only as an extraordinary tax (_temerarium_). After the
Social war of B.C. 89 the Italians became full citizens and shared this
exemption.

The second and most important source of revenue were the provinces.
There were royalties on mines, customs, rent of public land, and other
sources of profit to the government; but also every province paid a
_stipendium_—a certain sum of money—to the Roman treasury. The manner
in which it was paid—whether in money or produce, or a mixture of
the two—differed in different provinces, as also did the mode of its
assessment and collection; but the broad fact was that each province had
to furnish a sum of money, and that owners of property in a province
were liable to a _tributum_ or tax.[312]

In the time of Augustus there was no great change made in the nature or
incidence of this taxation; but the management of the treasury itself was
revolutionised. In the first place, the _ærarium_ instead of being under
the care of the yearly elected quæstors, who issued money on the order of
Senate or magistrates, was put under _præfecti_ appointed by the Emperor,
and though the Senate still had a nominal control over it, it was
really under his power. In the next place, a new _ærarium_ was formed,
afterwards called the _fiscus_, into which was paid the revenues of the
imperial provinces. This was entirely under the Emperor, and the tendency
was in time to have every extraordinary revenue, such as confiscations,
lapsed legacies (_caduca_), and the like, paid into it. Besides this
there was the _patrimonium Cæsarum_, the private property of the Emperor
in virtue of his office. To this belonged the whole revenues of Egypt and
the Thracian Chersonese, and other large estates. When Augustus talks of
his having supplemented the treasury or made distributions to the people,
it is often from this fund that he drew, though he had besides large
personal property (_res familiaris_), which he employed at times for the
same purpose.

Of course from the revenue of the provinces had to be deducted the cost
of their administration and defence. Provinces, therefore, which needed
large forces and constant defence from surrounding barbarians did not
pay. Cicero, indeed, asserts that in his time none of the provinces
except Asia paid for their expenses. This probably is an exaggeration,
but there is no doubt that the loss on some had to be put against the
gain on others, and that the balance of the yearly budget was not always
on the right side, as, at a later date, we know that Vespasian said that
the treasury wanted four hundred million sesterces (about £3,000,000
sterling) to be solvent. The outbreak of the German wars in A.D. 4, and
the large forces which it had long been necessary to keep upon the Rhine
had caused, if not a deficit, at any rate the near prospect of one. It
was just such a crisis as in old times would have justified the levying
of a _tributum_ as a special war tax. There were, however, two reasons
against Augustus doing this. In the first place, such a _tributum_ would
be temporary, and he wanted a permanency; and, in the second place, the
citizens had come to view freedom from the _tributum_ as their special
privilege, differentiating Italy from the subject provinces, and marking
them out as a governing body. True to his policy of avoiding offensive
names, while at the same time getting what he wanted, Augustus decided
against the _tributum_. What he did was to create a new department, an
army-pay treasury (_aes militare_), with two præfects of prætorian rank.
The money in this treasury was to be devoted to the pay and pensions
of the soldiers. He started it with a gift in his own name and that of
Tiberius of 170,000,000 sesterces (about £1,500,000), and arranged that
the tax which he had contrived soon after the end of the civil wars, the
1 per cent. on goods sold at auctions or by contract, should be paid
into it. But this was not sufficient for the purpose, and he had to
look round for other means of raising revenue. He did therefore what a
late Chancellor of the Exchequer did for us—he imposed death duties: 5
per cent. on all legacies except those from the nearest relatives. This
avoided the offensiveness of depriving the people of Italy of a valued
privilege, while it in fact brought them financially almost in a line
with the provinces. For those who paid _tributum_ did not pay _vicesima_,
and _vice versâ_. Still the tax offended a powerful class and met with
much resistance. The practice of leaving large legacies to friends, as
an acknowledgment of services rendered, was common in Italy, and the tax
therefore fell heavily upon the rich. In A.D. 13 a determined move was
made in the Senate to obtain its abolition. Augustus sent a written
communication to the Senate, pointing out that the money was necessary,
but asking them to contrive some other method of raising it. The Senators
declined to formulate any plan, and only answered that they were ready
to submit to _anything_ else. Thereupon Augustus proposed a _tributum_
or tax on land and houses. Confronted with this alternative the Senate
at once withdrew from opposition. It was a case of financial necessity,
and it must not be supposed that Augustus wished to lower the prestige
of Italy or the value of the citizenship. That was one of the points in
which he reversed the policy of Iulius, who had been lavish in bestowing
the citizenship, and seems to have had visions of a uniform Empire united
in privilege as in government. Augustus, on the other hand, was even
ultra-conservative and ultra-Roman in this respect. He made constant
difficulties about granting the citizenship. In answer to Tiberius, who
begged it for some favourite Greek, he insisted upon only granting it if
the man appeared personally and convinced him of the soundness of his
claim. Even Livia met with a refusal in behalf of some Gaul. The Emperor
offered to grant the man immunity from tribute, saying that he cared less
about a loss to his treasury than for vulgarising the citizenship.

[Sidenote: Declining health and strength.]

Though Augustus shewed in this transaction all his old tact and
statesmanship with no failure either in determination or power of
_finesse_, yet he was growing visibly feebler in body. He gave up
attending social functions; and it was too much for him to appear any
longer at meetings of the Senate. Accordingly, instead of the half-yearly
committee of twenty-five members who used to be appointed to prepare
measures for the House, a sort of inner cabinet of twenty members
appointed for a year—with any members of his family whom he chose—met
at his house and often round the couch on which he was reclining, and
their decisions were given the force of a _Senatus-consultum_. His
interest, however, in every detail was as keen as ever. For instance,
we have a letter from him to Livia, written at the end of A.D. 11,
as to the advisability of allowing Claudius (the future Emperor) to
appear in Rome during the ceremonies connected with the consulship of
his brother Germanicus. Claudius (now twenty-one) was reported to be
deformed and half-witted, and his mother Antonia herself described him as
scarcely human (_monstrum hominis_). The letter is worth reading, partly
because it is the only complete one (at any rate, of any length) which
we possess, and partly because it illustrates the care which Augustus
took to keep up the prestige of the imperial family, to avoid, above all
things, incurring popular ridicule, and his attention to minute details:—

“I have consulted with Tiberius, as you desired me to do, my dear Livia,
as to what is to be done about your grandson (Claudius) Tiberius. We
entirely agree in thinking that we must settle once for all what line we
are to take in regard to him. For if he is sound and, to use a common
expression, has all his wits about him, what possible reason can there
be for our doubting that he ought to be promoted through the same grades
and steps as his brother? But if we find that he is deficient, and so
deranged in mind and body as to be unfit for society, we must not give
people accustomed to scoff and sneer at such things a handle for casting
ridicule both on him and on us. The fact is that we shall always be in
a state of agitation if we stop to consider every detail as it occurs,
without having made up our minds whether to think him capable of holding
offices or not. On the present occasion, however, in regard to the point
on which you consult me, I do not object to his having charge of the
triclinium of the priests at the games of Mars if he will submit to
receive instructions from his relative, the son of Silanus, to prevent
his doing anything to make people stare or laugh. We agree that he is not
to be in the imperial box at the Circus. For he will be in full view of
everybody and be conspicuous. We agree that he is not to go to the Alban
Mount or to be in Rome on the days of the Latin festival. For if he is
good enough to be in his brother’s train to the mountain, why should
he not be honorary city prefect? Those are the decisions at which we
arrived, my dear Livia, and we wish them to be settled once for all to
prevent our wavering between hope and fear. You are at liberty, if you
choose, to give Antonia this part of my letter to read.”

[Sidenote: Confidence in Tiberius.]

Perhaps the voice is the voice of Tiberius, but the courtesy and
well-bred style are all Augustus’s. By this time the influence of
Tiberius was well established, and Augustus treats him as a successor who
has a right to be consulted on all family matters and important State
affairs. Since his return from Rhodes Tiberius had done eminent service
to the State both on the Rhine and in Illyricum. In appointing Varus
to Germany Augustus had made a mistake which he seldom committed. He
had nearly always picked good men, but P. Quintilius Varus had not only
been extortionate in his former province, but was neither energetic nor
prudent; and his experience among the unwarlike inhabitants of Syria was
not a good preparation for dealing with the brave and warlike Germans.
Tiberius knew him well, having been his colleague in the consulship of
B.C. 13, and would certainly not have appointed him. It was to Tiberius
that the Emperor then turned to retrieve the disaster and confront the
almost more serious dangers in Illyricum. And if he found him trustworthy
in the field, this letter shows how much confidence he felt in him
at home. It was a common report that Augustus knew and disliked his
character. The lackeys of the palace gave out that he had on one occasion
exclaimed, “Unhappy people of Rome who will some day be the victims of
those slow grinders!” And in a speech to the Senate some expressions
used by him were taken to convey an apology for his reserved and sullen
manners, and an acknowledgment, therefore, of his mistrust or dislike.
But it is abundantly plain that in these last years he not only trusted
his military abilities, but felt a sincere affection for himself. In
earlier times, before the retreat to Rhodes, the short notes written
to him (parts of which are preserved by Suetonius[313]) are playful
and intimate; and though he was vexed at his retirement and answered a
suggestion of return by a message bidding him “dismiss all concern for
his relatives, whom he had abandoned with such excessive eagerness,”[314]
yet the fragments preserved of the Emperor’s letters to him in these
later times breathe not only admiration, but warm affection. “Goodbye,
Tiberius, most delightful of men! Success to you in the field, you who
serve the Muses as well as me! Most delightful of men, and, as I hope
to be happy, bravest of heroes and steadiest of generals!” And again:
“How splendidly managed are your summer quarters! I am decidedly of
opinion that, in the face of so many untoward circumstances and such
demoralisation of the troops, no one could have borne himself with
greater prudence than you are doing! The officers now at Rome who have
served with you all confess that the verse might have been written for
you, ‘One man by vigilance restored the State.’” Once more: “Whenever
anything occurs that calls for more than usually earnest thought or that
stirs my spleen, what I miss most, by heaven, is my dear Tiberius, and
that passage of Homer always occurs to me—

    “‘If he but follow, e’en from burning fire
    We both shall back return, so wise is he!’”

And in the midst of his laborious campaign the Emperor writes to him
anxiously: “When I hear or read that you are worn out by the protracted
nature of your labours, heaven confound me if I do not shudder in every
limb; and I beseech you to spare yourself, lest if we hear of your being
ill your mother and I should expire and the Roman people run the risk of
losing their empire. It doesn’t matter a bit whether I am well or not as
long as you are not well. I pray the gods to preserve you to us and to
suffer you to be well now and always, unless they abhor the Roman people.”

These letters seem sufficiently to refute the idle stories of the _gêne_
that his presence was to Augustus, of his being a wet blanket to cheerful
conversation, and a makeshift with which the Emperor was forced to put
up in default of better heirs. Nor did Tiberius fall short in respect
and loyal service. After his adoption in A.D. 4, he immediately accepted
the position of a son under the _patria potestas_, abstained from
manumissions and other acts of a man who was _sui iuris_, and apparently
transferred his residence to the palace, and seems really to have taken
the burden from shoulders no longer strong enough to bear it.

[Sidenote: Death of Augustus at Nola, August 19, A.D. 14.]

For now the end was near, portended as the pious or credulous believed
by many omens. There was an eclipse of the sun,[315] and various fiery
meteors in the sky. On one of his statues the letter C of Cæsar was
melted by lightning, and the augurs prophesied, or afterwards invented
the prediction, that he would die within a hundred days and join the
gods—_æsar_ being good Etruscan for “divinities.” He himself seems to
have been made somewhat nervous by certain accidents that might be
twisted into omens. The early part of A.D. 14 was taken up with the
usual legal business, but also with the Census, which he held this year
in virtue of his consular power and with Tiberius as his colleague. The
organisation of the city into _vici_ probably made the actual clerical
work easy and rapid, but when that was over came the ceremony of “closing
the lustrum” (_condere lustrum_), and the offering of solemn sacrifice
and prayer. This took place in the Campus Martius, and large crowds
assembled to witness it. But the Emperor, uneasy at something which
he thought ominous, or perhaps really feeling unwell, would not read
the solemn vows, which according to custom had been written out and
were now put into his hands. He said that he should not live to fulfil
them and handed them over to Tiberius to read. After this ceremony was
over, Augustus was anxious to get away from Rome and take his usual
yachting tour along the Latin and Campanian coast. On this occasion he
had the farther object of accompanying Tiberius as far as Beneventum
on the Appian road, on his way to Brundisium and Illyricum, where some
difficulties resulting from the recent war required his presence and
authority. But various legal causes awaiting decision detained the
Emperor in the city. He was restive and impatient at the delay, and
petulantly exclaimed that “if they let everything stop them he should
never be at Rome again.” At length, however, he set out, accompanied
by Livia and Tiberius and a numerous court. They reached the coast at
Astura, in the delta of a river of the same name, which falls into the
sea at the southern point of the bay of Antium. It was a quiet place
though there were seaside villas near, and there Cicero had spent the
months of his mourning for Tullia, finding consolation in the solitude
of the woods which skirt the side of the stream. At Astura the party
embarked, but owing to the state of the wind they did so by night. A
chill then caught brought on diarrhœa, and laid the foundation of his
fatal illness. Nevertheless the voyage along the Campanian coast and the
adjacent islands was continued till they reached Capreæ. It was on this
