voyage that, happening to touch at Puteoli, he was so much delighted and
cheered by the thanks offered him by the crew of an Alexandrian corn-ship
for his safeguarding of the seas. At Capreæ he seems to have stayed some
time, amusing himself by watching the young athletes training for the
Greek games at Naples—the only town in Italy except Rhegium which at this
time retained any traces of Hellenic customs and life. He gave parties,
also, at which he asked his Roman guests to dress in Greek fashion and
speak Greek, and the Greeks to use Roman dress and speak Latin. There
was the usual distribution of presents, and on one occasion he gave
a banquet to the athletes in training, and watched them after dinner
pelting each other with apples and other parts of the dessert. It was a
custom, more honoured in the breach than in the observance, with which he
was familiar. He once entertained a certain Curtius, who prided himself
on his taste in cookery, and who thought a fat thrush that had been put
before him was ill-done. “May I despatch it?” he said to the Emperor. “Of
course,” was the reply; upon which he threw it out of the window. On this
occasion the aged Emperor, feeling, we may suppose, somewhat better and
glad to be away from the cares of State, enjoyed this curious horse-play.
He was also particularly cheerful during these days at Capreæ, pleasing
himself with inventing Greek verses and then defying one of Tiberius’
favourite astrologers to name the play from which they came.

Before long, however, he crossed to Naples, with his illness still upon
him, but with alternate rallies and relapses. At Naples he had to sit
through some long gymnastic contests that were held every fifth year
in his honour. Such a function in an August day at Naples would have
been trying to the most vigorous and healthy, but for a man in his
seventy-sixth year, and suffering from such a complaint, it must have
been deadly. He preferred, however, not to disappoint people eager to
shew him honour. He then fulfilled his purpose of accompanying Tiberius
to Beneventum, and having taken leave of him there turned back towards
Naples. But he was never to reach it. At Nola, about eighteen English
miles short of that town, his illness became so acute that he was obliged
to stop at the villa there in which his father had died seventy-two
years before. Messengers were hastily sent to recall Tiberius. With
him the dying man had a long private conversation, in which he seems
to have imparted to him his wishes and counsels as to the government;
and perhaps it was now that he pointed out the three nobles who were
possible candidates for the succession—“Marcus Lepidus, who was fit for
it, but would not care to take it; Asinius Gallus, who would desire it,
but was unfit; and L. Arruntius, who was not unfit for it and would have
the courage to seize it if opportunity offered.” But this conference over
he busied himself with no other affairs of State. He seemed to acquiesce
in the fact that he had done with the world, its vexations and problems.
On the last day of his life, the 19th of August (his lucky month!) the
only question which he continually repeated was whether his situation
was causing any commotion out of doors. Then he asked for a mirror
and directed his attendants to arrange his hair and close his already
relaxing jaws, that he might not shock beholders by the ghastliness of
his appearance. Then his friends were admitted to say goodbye. With a
pathetic mixture of playfulness and sadness he asked them whether “they
thought that he had played life’s farce fairly well?” quoting a common
tag at the end of plays:—

    “If aught of good our sport had, clap your hands,
    And send us, gentles all, with joy away.”

These being dismissed, he turned to Livia and asked for news of one of
her granddaughters who was ill; but even as he spoke he felt the end was
come—“Livia, don’t forget our wedded life, goodbye!” And as he tried to
kiss her lips he fell back dead.

It was a rapid and painless end, for which he had so often hoped, an
_euthanasia_ that he used to pray for, for himself and his friends. Up
to the last his mind had been clear, with only the slightest occasional
wandering. And so after long years of work and struggle, of mixed evil
and good, of stern cruelties and beneficent exertion, of desperate
dangers and well-earned honours, the great Emperor as he lay dying looked
into the eyes which he had loved best in the world.

The body was borne to Rome by the municipal magistrates of the several
towns along the road, the _cortège_ always moving by night because of the
heat, and the bier being deposited in the court-house of each town till
it reached Bovillæ, twelve miles from Rome. There a procession of Roman
knights took it in charge, having obtained that honour from the consuls,
conducted it to Rome, and deposited it in the vestibule of his own house
on the Palatine.

With not unnatural or unpardonable emotion some extravagant proposals
were made in the Senate as to funeral honours and general mourning. But
Tiberius disliked such excesses, and the funeral though stately was
simple. The bier was carried on the shoulders of Senators to the Campus.
Twice the _cortège_ stopped, first at the Rostra, where Drusus, the son
of Tiberius, delivered a funeral oration (_laudatio_), and again at the
front of the temple of Iulius, where Tiberius himself read a panegyric.
Drusus had dwelt chiefly on his private virtues, Tiberius confined
himself to his public work. He began with a reference to his youthful
services to the state immediately after the death of Cæsar; his success
in putting an end to the civil wars, and his clemency after them. He
spoke of the skill with which, while splendidly rewarding his ministers,
he yet prevented them from gaining a power detrimental to the state; of
his disinterested and constitutional conduct when, having everything in
his hands, he yet shared the power with the people and Senate; of his
unselfishness in the division of the provinces in taking the difficult
ones upon himself; of his equity in leaving Senate and constitution
independent; of his economy and liberality; of the good order which
he kept and the wholesome laws which he carried; of his sympathy with
the tastes and enjoyments of the people; of his hatred of flattery and
tolerance of free speech. The address was read and had been carefully
composed. There is not much fervour or eloquence in it, but it skilfully
put the points which Augustus would himself have put, and indeed had put
in that _apologia pro vita sua_ which we know from the inscription at
Ancyra.

The speeches over, the _cortège_ moved on to the Campus Martius,
where the body was burnt on the pyre prepared for it, and the ashes
ceremoniously collected by eminent equites, who according to custom wore
only their tunics, without the toga, ungirdled, and with bare feet.
The urn was then deposited in the Mausoleum which Augustus had himself
erected in B.C. 28 on the Campus close to the curving river-bank, which
had already received the ashes of his nephew Marcellus, of his sister
Octavia, of his two grandsons, and of his great friend and minister
Agrippa, but was sternly closed by his will to his erring daughter and
granddaughter.

[Sidenote: His will, and other documents left by him.]

Always careful and businesslike, he left his testamentary dispositions
and the accounts of his administration in perfect order. His will,
which had been deposited with the Vestal Virgins and was now read aloud
by Drusus in the Senate, made Tiberius heir to two-thirds, Livia to
one-third of his private property. In case of their predeceasing him it
was to be divided between Drusus (son of Tiberius), Germanicus, and his
three sons, as “second heirs.” There were liberal legacies to citizens
and soldiers and to various friends. The property thus disposed of was
the _res familiaris_: the _Patrimonium Cæsarum_—Egypt, the Thracian
Chersonese, and other estates—went to his successor in the principate.
The will contained an apology for the smallness of the amount thus coming
to his heirs (150,000,000 sesterces or about £1,200,000) on the plea that
he had devoted to the public service nearly all the vast legacies which
had fallen to him. By the will Livia was also adopted into the Iulian
_gens_ and was to take his name. She was thenceforth therefore known as
Iulia Augusta, and seems to have assumed that thereby she obtained a
certain share in the imperial prerogatives, a claim which led to much
friction between herself and her son.

Besides the will, and a roll containing directions as to his funeral,
there were two other documents drawn up by Augustus with great care.
One was a _breviarium totius imperii_, an exact account of the state of
the Empire, the number of soldiers under colours, the amount of money
in the treasury or the _fiscus_, the arrears due, and the names of
those freedmen who were to be held responsible. As a kind of appendix
to this were some maxims of state which he wished to impress upon his
successor: such as, not to extend the citizenship too widely, but to
maintain the distinction between Roman and subject; to select able men
for administrative duties, but not to allow them to become too powerful
or think themselves indispensable; and not to extend the frontiers of the
Empire.

A third roll contained a statement of his own services and achievements
(_index rerum a se gestarum_). Meant to be preserved as an inscription,
it is in what we might call the telegraphic style, a series of brief
statements of facts without note or comment beyond the suggestiveness of
a word here and there designedly used. Yet it is essentially a defence
of his life and policy—the oldest extant autobiography. He directed it
to be engraved on bronze columns and set up outside the Mausoleum. This
was no doubt done, but the bronze columns have long ago disappeared.[316]
Fortunately, however, copies of the inscription were engraved elsewhere
(with a Greek translation) in temples of “Rome and Augustus,” as at
Apollonia in Pisidia and Ancyra in Galatia. That at Ancyra (_Angora_)
exists nearly complete to this day, and some portions at Apollonia. No
life of Augustus could be complete without this document, which is
therefore given in an English dress at the end of this book.

The Senate at once proceeded to decree divine honours to him. A temple
was to be built at Rome, which was afterwards consecrated by Livia and
Tiberius. Others were erected elsewhere, and the house at Nola in which
he died was consecrated. His image on a gilded couch was placed in the
temple of Mars, and festivals (_Augustalia_) were established with a
college of Augustales to maintain them in all parts of the Empire, as
well as an annual festival on the Palatine which continued to be held by
succeeding Emperors.

[Sidenote: Rumours as to the death of Augustus.]

The usual foolish rumours followed his death. Some said that Tiberius
did not reach Nola in time to see him alive; that he had died some
time before, but that Livia closed the doors and concealed the truth.
Others even said that his death had been hastened by Livia by means of
a poisoned fig; and professed to explain it by a piece of secret court
history. Shortly before his death, they said, Augustus had gone attended
only by Fabius Maximus on a secret visit to Agrippa Postumus in the
island of Planasia, to which he had been confined since the cancelling
of his adoption in A.D. 5; and that Livia fearing that he would relent
towards him and name him as successor, determined that he should not live
to do so, Fabius Maximus having meanwhile died suddenly and somewhat
mysteriously. But the authentic accounts of his last illness and death
give the lie to such an unnecessary crime. Unhappily the jealousy of
the unfortunate Agrippa Postumus was a fact which helped to spread such
stories, but it was a jealousy roused by the knowledge of some secret
plots to carry him off and set him up as a rival, and “the first crime
of the new reign”—his assassination by his guards—must, we fear, lie at
the door of either Tiberius or Livia. Another report was that the soul of
Augustus flew up to heaven in the shape of an eagle that rose from his
pyre. Nor must the ingenious Senator—Numerius Atticus—be omitted, who
declared on oath that he had seen the soul of the Emperor ascending, and
was said to have received a present of 25,000 denarii (about £1,000) from
Livia in acknowledgment of this loyal clearness of vision.

[Sidenote: The continuous government.]

The prudent forethought of Augustus in regard to the succession answered
its purpose. There was practically no break in the government. Tiberius
was possessed of _tribunicia potestas_, which enabled him to summon and
consult the Senate. He also, in virtue of his proconsular imperium,
gave the watchword to the prætorian guard, and despatched orders to the
legions in service in the provinces. There was, indeed, some question
as to whether this imperium legally terminated with the death of the
_princeps_, but the matter was settled by all classes taking the oath
(_sacramentum_) to him, and all the powers and honours (except the title
of _pater patriæ_, which he would not accept) were shortly afterwards
voted to him in the Senate and confirmed by a _lex_. His professed
reluctance to accept the whole burden only brought out more clearly how
the work of Augustus had made the rule of a single man inevitable: “I
ask you, sir, which part of the government you wish to have committed
to you?” said Asinius Gallus. No answer was possible. A man could not
control the provinces without command of the army. But he could not
control the army if another man controlled the exchequer. He could not
keep order in Rome and Italy, if another had command of all the legions
and fleets abroad, and could at any moment invade the country or starve
it out by stopping the corn-ships. And if a man had the full control of
the purse and the sword, the rest followed. It was well enough for the
officials to have the old titles and perform some of the old work, but if
the central authority were once removed there would be chaos. The Senate
had attempted to exercise that central authority and failed. It could not
secure the loyalty of men who, exercising undisturbed power in distant
lands, soon grew impatient of the control of a body of mixed elements
and divergent views, which they often conceived to be under the influence
of cliques inimical to themselves. The provinces too as they became
more Romanised were certain to claim to be put on a more equal status
with Italy: they could only be held together by a man who had equal
authority everywhere, never by a local town council. Augustus, indeed,
did not realise this development, or rather he feared its advent. In his
eyes Rome ought still to rule, but could only do so by all its powers
being centred in one man, who could consult the interest and attract the
reverence of all parts of the Empire alike. The success of this plan
depended, of course, on the character of the man, and perhaps, above all,
on his abilities as a financier; but, at any rate, it was impossible
to return to a system of divided functions, and constitutional checks,
which were shewn to be inoperative the moment a magistrate drew the sword
and defied them. So far the work of Augustus stood, and admitted of no
reaction. Republican ideals could only be entertained as pious opinions,
not more practical than some of the republican virtues, on the belief in
which they were founded.




CHAPTER XV

THE EMPEROR AUGUSTUS, HIS CHARACTER AND AIMS, HIS WORK AND FRIENDS

    _Hic vir hic est, tibi quem_
    _promitti sæpius audis._


[Sidenote: The early career and change of character.]

When a great piece of work has been done in the world it is not difficult
to find fault with it. A man seldom if ever sees the bearing and ultimate
results of his own actions, or carries out all that he intended to do.
Even when he seems to have done so, time reveals faults, miscalculations,
failures. At an age when among us a boy is just leaving school, Augustus
found himself the heir of a great policy and a great name amidst the
ruins of a constitution and the _disjecta membra_ of a great Empire.
A comparatively small city state had conquered the greater part of
the known world, and proposed to govern it by the machinery which had
sufficed when its territory was insignificant, not extending at any rate
beyond the shores of Italy. A close corporation, greedy and licentious,
had divided amongst its members the vast profits from the gradually
extending dominions. The central authority which should have restrained
the rulers of distant provinces and the collection of their revenues
was composed to a great extent of those most deeply interested in the
corruptions which it was their duty to judge and condemn. Loyalty to this
central authority grew weaker and weaker, party spirit grew stronger
and less scrupulous. In the desperate struggle for wealth and luxury men
stuck at nothing. Bloodshed bred bloodshed, violence provoked violence,
till good citizens and honourable men (and there were always such) found
themselves helpless; and the constitution which had rested on the loyalty
of magistrates and citizens was ready to fall at the first touch of
resolute disobedience. Then a great man appeared. Iulius Cæsar had not
been free from the vices or corruption of his contemporaries; but party
connections at home led him to sympathise with the people, and the ten
years of war and government in Gaul, during which his enemies at home
were constantly threatening and thwarting him, had convinced him that
the existing constitution was doomed. He was resolved to attempt its
reconstruction, even at the risk of civil war. But civil war is a sea
of unknown extent. Conqueror though he was in all its battles, it left
him only a few months to elaborate reforms. In those he did some great
things; but his revival of the Sullan Dictatorship was too crude a return
to monarchy, while the exigencies of civil war forced him to employ
inferior agents. The aristocratic clique saw themselves about to lose
their cherished privilege of tyranny and extortion, and they killed him.

When Octavian came home to take up his inheritance, he would naturally
have joined Antony, and taken immediate vengeance on the guilty clique.
But he found him intent upon the consolidation of his own position,
and not inclined to admit his claim to the inheritance or to any share
of power. He therefore outwardly joined the leaders of the party which
he detested in order to get rid of Antony and forestall his bid for
