autocracy. The vicissitudes of the struggle which followed, ending in
the triumvirate and the division of the Roman world, infected him with
the poison of civil strife—the cruelty which treats honourable enemies
as outlaws, and regards personal triumph as the only end of political
exertion. This period in his career and in the development of his
character ends with the victory over Sextus Pompeius, in B.C. 36, and the
additional security gained by the successes of Agrippa in Gaul during the
two preceding years. From that time he began to regard himself as the
champion of law and order, as the defender of Italy, and the guarantee of
peace in the Western Provinces.

Then came a great danger—the danger of a separation of East and West.
Under the influence of his passion for Cleopatra, Antony was building
up a new empire of subordinate kings, it is true, but subordinate to
Alexandria not Rome: and Alexandria was being adorned with the spoils
of Asiatic temples to make it a worthy capital of the Eastern world.
How far this was really to involve a diminution of the Roman Empire
was probably not clear to Antony himself. The old provinces were not
formally separated, but they were pared and diminished to round off the
new kingdoms for his and Cleopatra’s children. At Rome the danger was
looked upon as a real one; and once more Augustus felt that if he was to
have a free hand in the renovation of the Empire which he contemplated,
Antony must disappear. No doubt every artifice was employed to discredit
his opponent, and to convince the Roman people that their dominion in
the East was slipping from them. But, however Machiavellian his tactics,
there was a solid basis of fact beneath them; a real danger or separation
had existed. The victory of Actium settled that question; and when
the few severities which followed it were over, we are happily called
thenceforth to contemplate the legislator and reformer, the administrator
of, on the whole, a peaceful Empire. There were no more civil wars, and
no serious conspiracies. With rare exceptions—perhaps only the Arabian
expedition—the wars in which Augustus was henceforth engaged were the
necessary consequences of a long frontier. War was often prevented by
diplomacy, and such wars as were undertaken were always successful,
with the exception of those with the Germans, and even in their case
immediate danger was averted.

The moral problem presented by the change from ruthless cruelty to wise
and persistent clemency has exercised the minds of philosophers and
historians ever since. “It was not clemency,” says Seneca, “but a surfeit
of cruelty.” But this explains nothing. If Augustus had ever been cruel
for cruelty’s sake, the increased opportunities of exercising it would
have whetted his appetite for blood as it did in some of his successors.
It was circumstances that had changed, not altogether the man. Still, no
doubt, success softened (it does not always) Augustus’s character. His
ministers were humane men and in favour of milder methods; his wife was
a high-minded woman, and always ready to succour distress, as she shewed
during the proscriptions, and afterwards in her son’s reign. He had among
his immediate friends philosophers and men of letters, whose influence,
so far as it went, was humanising. And lastly such opposition as still
existed was no longer of irreconcilables who had known “liberty”; a
new generation had grown up which on the whole acquiesced in the peace
and security of a benevolent despotism. It was a new era, and Augustus
became a new man. Full of honours and possessed with irresistible powers,
feeling the responsibility heavily, and often in vain desiring rest, he
had no farther personal object to gain beyond the credit of having served
his country and saved the Empire. The apologia of the _index rerum_,
brief and bald as it is, was intended to shew that he had done this.

[Sidenote: The value of his work.]

In estimating the value of his work we are met with this difficulty at
the very threshold of the inquiry, that his object was to avoid quick and
conspicuous changes. Instead of discussing some heroic measure we have
to examine a multitude of details. In every department of political and
social life we trace his hand. Working day and night, he was scheming
to alter what he thought bad, and to introduce what he thought good.
The reconstruction and embellishment of the city, the restoration of
religion, the rehabilitation of marriage, measures necessary for the
security of Rome and Italy, for the better government and material
prosperity of the provinces, for the solvency of the exchequer, and for
the protection of commerce—all these continually occupied his time and
his thoughts. Of this steady industry this or that result may be open to
criticism, but, on the whole, it seems certain that it increased the good
order and prosperity of the Empire, and therefore added to the comfort
and happiness of innumerable lives.

[Sidenote: Advantages and disadvantages of the autocracy.]

But of course the upshot of it all was the establishment of a monarchy;
and it still remains to be considered how far its benefits were
counterbalanced by evils arising from the loss of freedom. It might be
argued that tyrants always appeal to their right use of power however
irregularly obtained, but that the plea is beside the question. Freedom
is the only guarantee of the _continuance_ of good government. The
beneficent tyrant may any day be succeeded by a bad one. The policy of
Augustus had led the people on step by step to forfeit this freedom,
and lose even the taste for it, lulled to sleep by the charms of safety
and luxury. When the glamour had faded from some eyes, it was too late.
The generation which had known freedom had disappeared; the experience
necessary for working the old machinery no longer existed. The few who
still remembered with regret the old constitution, under which they had
hoped to take an independent share of political activity, had nothing
left to them but sullen submission.

[Sidenote: In the provinces.]

In the provinces, indeed, this consideration did not apply. The despotism
there added to the sum of happiness and took nothing away. They had lost
their independence long ago. They were already under a master, a master
who was changed at short intervals, whom it was very difficult to bring
to an account if he were oppressive, in whose selection they had had
absolutely no share, and whose character they had no means of calculating
beforehand. They might one year be enjoying all the benefits of an able
and disinterested ruler, the next they might find themselves in the power
of a tyrannical extortioner, selfish, cynical, cruel. The old republican
names and ideals were nothing to them; or rather they suggested organised
oppression and a conspiracy to refuse redress. The change to one master,
who had everything to gain by their prosperity, and was at the same
time master of their old oppressors, must have seemed in every respect
a blessing. If there was any drawback it was that nationality and the
desire for self-government were killed by kindness. In all difficulties
and disasters they looked to the Emperor for aid and seldom looked in
vain. In the East especially this was probably not wholesome; yet the
immediate effects in producing prosperity and comfort were marked enough
to put aside for the present all such scruples.

[Sidenote: In Italy.]

But for the governing nation itself, while some of the benefits were
no less manifest, the mischievous results were more easy to point out.
Material prosperity was much increased. The city was made a pleasant
and attractive place of residence. Italy was partially repeopled with
an industrious class. Commerce was encouraged and protected, literature
and the fine arts were fostered, and the Palace on the whole set a good
example of simplicity of living. But, on the other hand, the rule of a
single person stifled political life. By the system of _curæ_ or special
commissions all administrative work was transferred to nominees of the
Emperor, who were often his intimate friends, or even his freedmen,
bound to him by the closest ties of subordination. The old magistracies
became unattractive, not only because they no longer led as a matter of
course to profitable employment abroad, but because their holders had
little of interest to do. The Senate, though treated with respect and
retaining some importance as a high court of justice, was practically no
longer a governing body. It was wholly at the beck of the Emperor, and
such work of consequence as it still performed was often transacted by
small committees, the main body merely assenting. In spite, therefore,
of the dignity of the Senator’s position, it ceased to attract the best
men. The higher classes turned away from a political career, and gave
themselves up more and more to luxurious idleness. The rise of the
freedman—practically the rule of favourites—was clearly foreshadowed,
though owing to the industry of Augustus, and his genius for detail, it
did not become prominent in his time. As the upper classes were thus to
a certain extent demoralised by the Principate, so the city proletariat
was pampered and made still more effete. The city was made only too
attractive to them, and they were to be kept in good humour by an endless
series of games and shows. There was a good deal of truth in the retort
of the player Pylades, when reproved by Augustus for his feud with
Bathyllus, that it was for the Emperor’s advantage that the people should
have their attention fixed on the playhouse rather than on politics.
But they soon began not only to regard these amusements as their right:
they expected also to be fed at the cost of the government, whether by
direct gifts of money, or by the distribution of cheap or even gratuitous
corn. Nor can it be said that the amusements provided for them were of
an elevating nature. Augustus boasts in the _Index_ (c. 20), that he
gave seven shows of gladiators in his own name or that of his sons, in
which about 10,000 men in all had fought;[317] and besides other games
twenty-six _venationes_ of “African beasts,” _i.e._, mostly elephants, in
which about 3,500 were killed. The mob of Rome needed little brutalising,
but they got it in abundance.

With such drawbacks, however, it still must be owned that the
administration of Augustus largely increased the sum of human happiness
by the mitigation of oppression in the provinces, and by the suppression
of disorder in Rome and Italy. The finances were placed on a sound
footing, property was rendered secure, and men felt everywhere that they
might pursue their business with every chance of enjoying the fruits of
their labours. This was something after a century of revolution more or
less acute, and twenty years of downright civil war. It is worth while to
attempt to picture to ourselves the man who was the author of these good
and bad results.

[Sidenote: The personal appearance and character of Augustus.]

Augustus was a short man (just under five feet seven inches), but so well
proportioned that the defect in height was not noticed unless he was
standing by much taller men. He was remarkably handsome at all periods of
his life, with an expression of calm dignity, whether silent or speaking,
which involuntarily inspired respect. His eyes were grey, and so bright
and keen that it was not easy to meet their gaze. If he had a personal
vanity it was in regard to them. He liked to think that they dazzled
those on whom he looked, and he was pleased at the answer of the Roman
eques, who, when asked why he turned away, replied, “Because I could not
bear the lightning of your eyes.” Vergil gratified this vanity of his
patron when in the description of the battle of Actium (_Æn._, viii. 650)
he pictures him,

    _Stans celsa in puppi; geminas cui tempora flammas_
    _Læta vomunt._

And the Emperor Iulian, in “The Banquet of the Emperors,” laughs not
unkindly at the same weakness when he introduces him, “changing colour
like a chameleon, and wishing that the beams darting from his eyes
should be like those of the mighty sun.” The busts, statues, and coins
of Augustus fully confirm this statement as to his beauty; and in the
triumphal statue found in Livia’s villa at Prima Porta, the artist has
succeeded in suggesting the brightness and keenness of his eyes. He was
usually clean shaven, but from his uncle’s death to B.C. 38, according
to Dio (48, 34), he grew his beard as a sign of mourning; though coins
showed him with a slight whisker till about B.C. 36. These portraits
are full of life and character. The clear-cut features, the firm mouth
and chin, the steady eyes, the carelessly ordered hair, the lines on
forehead and cheeks, suggest a man who had suffered and laboured, who was
yet self-controlled, calm, and clear-headed. It is a face not without
some tenderness, but capable of firing up into hot indignation and even
cruelty. There is an air of suffering but of determined victory over
pain; altogether a face of a man who had done a great work and risen
to a high place in the world and knew it; who had confidence, lastly,
in his star. On taking leave of Gaius Cæsar, it is said, he wished him
“the integrity of Pompey, the courage of Alexander, and his own good
fortune.” On some of his coins beneath the head crowned with the crown
of twelve rays, is the Iulian star, first observed at the funeral of
Iulius Cæsar, and which he adopted as the sign of his own high fortunes:
on others the Sphinx, which he at first adopted as his signet—emblem
perhaps of a purpose unbetrayed. Augustus was accomplished in the
subjects recognised in the education of his time, though he neither wrote
nor spoke Greek with ease. He had studied and practised rhetoric, and
had a good and correct taste in style, avoiding the use of far-fetched
or obsolete words and expressions, or affected conceits. He ridiculed
Antony for his “Asiatic” style of oratory, full of flowers of speech and
flamboyant sentences; and writing to his granddaughter, Agrippina, while
praising her abilities he warns her against pedantic expressions whether
in conversation or writing. Without being an orator, he spoke clearly
and to the point, assisted by a pleasant voice, which he took pains to
preserve and improve. In the Senate, the camp, and private conferences,
he preferred to read his speeches, though he could also speak well on
the spur of the moment. In domestic life, though somewhat strict, he
was generally simple and charming. He lived much with wife and children,
associating himself with their employments, and even joining in the games
of the latter. He personally superintended the education of his adopted
sons, taught them his own method of shorthand, and interested himself in
their reading. He had old-fashioned ideas about the proper employment of
the women in his family. They were expected to busy themselves in weaving
for the use of the household, to visit and receive visits only with his
approval, and not to converse on subjects that could not with propriety
be entered on the day’s journal. Though his daughter and granddaughters
were well educated, and had a taste for literature, it may well be
that a home thus conducted was so dull as partly to account for their
aberrations in the fuller liberty of married life.

His attachments were warm and constant, and he was not illiberal to
his friends or disinclined to give them his full confidence. But he
was always his own master. No friend or freedman gained control over
him or rose to the odious position of “favourite.” He allowed and even
liked freedom of speech, but it was always without loss of dignity. He
was not a man with whom liberties were taken even by the most intimate.
He was quick tempered, but knew it, and was ready to admit of caution
and advice, as in the well-known story of Mæcenas, watching him in
court about to condemn a number of prisoners (probably in the civil
war times), and throwing across to him a note with the words, _Surge
tandem carnifex!_ “Tis time to rise, hangman!” Or when he received with
complaisance the advice of Athenodorus (hero of the covered sedan) that
when he was angry he should say over the letters of the alphabet before
coming to a decision.

[Sidenote: His ultra-Roman views.]

In later times he was always looked back upon by his successors as the
true founder of the Empire, and the best model for their guidance;
yet it is doubtful how far he had wide and far-reaching views. He was
a statesman who dealt with facts as he found them and did the best
he could. He was deeply impressed with the difficulty of his task.
Commenting on the fact of Alexander the Great having accomplished his
conquests by the age of 32, and then feeling at a loss what to do for the
rest of his life, he remarked that he “was surprised that Alexander did
not regard the right ordering of the empire he possessed a heavier task
than winning it.” But in one important respect at least he was wrong in
his idea of what he had done. He never conceived of an empire filled with
citizens enjoying equal rights, or in which Rome could possibly occupy a
secondary place. He was ultra-Roman in his views; and worked and schemed
to maintain the supremacy of the Eternal City. That supremacy may indeed
be said to have remained to this day in the region of spiritual affairs.
But it was destined to disappear politically, except in name, before many
generations had passed away, and as a logical consequence of much that
he had himself done. A new Rome and a new Empire—though always resting
on the old title and theory—were to arise, in which Italy would be a
province like the rest, and old Rome but the shadow of a mighty name.

[Sidenote: The court circle.]

Among those who exercised a permanent influence on Augustus, the first
place must be given to LIVIA (B.C. 54-A.D. 29). The writers on Augustus
comment on the romantic revolution of her fortunes. After the affair of
Perusia she fled with her husband, Nero, and her little son, Tiberius,
from Augustus, who was to be her husband, and was to be succeeded by her
son. Her divorce and prompt marriage to Augustus, while within a few
months of being again a mother, is not only a thing revolting to our
ideas, it was strictly against Roman principles and habits, and required
all her new husband’s commanding influence to be admitted as legal. Yet
Suetonius says, and says truly, that he continued “to love and honour her
exclusively to the end” (_dilexit et probavit unice et perseveranter_).
The same writer gives an account of the Emperor’s intrigues with other
women. To our ideas the two statements are contradictory, but Suetonius
would not have thought so. Conjugal love was not _amor_; the latter was
thought even inconsistent with, or at least undesirable in, conjugal
affection. He means that throughout his life Augustus continued to
regard her with affection, to respect her character, and give weight to
her opinion. For my own part, I believe that something more might be
said, and that much of what has come down to us as to the conduct of the
Emperor may be dismissed as malignant gossip. But however that may be,
