the influence of Livia over him seems never to have failed, and it was
exercised on the side of clemency and generosity. She set an excellent
example of pure and dignified conduct to Roman society, and, though
abstaining from interference generally in political matters, was ready to
give advice when called upon. She seems usually to have accompanied him,
when possible, on his foreign progresses or residences away from Rome.
When Herod visited Augustus at Aquileia in B.C. 14, she appears to have
shared her husband’s liking for that strange medley of magnificence and
cruelty, and sent him costly gifts for the festivity which accompanied
the completion of the new city of Cæsarea Sebaste in B.C. 13. The usual
allegation against her is that she worked for the succession of her
sons, Tiberius and Drusus, as against the Iulian family, represented
by the son of Octavia and the children of Iulia. To secure this object
she was accused in popular rumour of compassing the deaths successively
of Marcellus, of Gaius and Lucius Cæsar, of Agrippa Postumus, and,
finally, of having even hastened the end of Augustus himself. This last
is not mentioned by Suetonius, and is only related by Dio as a report,
for which he gives no evidence, and which he does not appear to have
believed. Tacitus records the criticism of her as a _gravis noverca_ to
the family of the Cæsars, and seems to accept her guilt in regard to
Gaius and Iulius (_Ann._ 4, 71). But he is also constrained to admit that
she exercised a humanising influence over Tiberius, that his victims
constantly found refuge and protection in her palace, and that she was
benevolent and charitable to the poor—maintaining a large number of
orphan boys and girls by her bounty. The most suspicious case against
her is the execution of Agrippa Postumus immediately after the death
of Augustus—“the first crime of the new reign.” It will never be known
whether the order for that cruel deed issued from her or her crafty
son. The death of Marcellus was in no way suspicious, as it occurred in
a season of exceptional unhealthiness, when large numbers were dying
at Rome of malarial fever. As to the deaths of Gaius and Lucius, no
suspicion seems to have occurred to Augustus, and he was keenly anxious
for their survival. The poisoned fig supposed to have been given to
himself is a familiar feature in the stories of great men’s death of
every age in Italy. Tacitus in the famous summing up of her character,
while acknowledging the purity of her domestic conduct, yet declares that
her social manners were more free than was considered becoming among
women of an earlier time; that as a mother she was extravagantly fond, as
a wife too complaisant; and that her character was a combination of her
husband’s adroitness and her son’s insincerity. He by no means intends to
draw a pleasing portrait. He seldom does. But what we may take for true
is that she was beautiful, loyal to her husband, open-handed and generous
to the distressed, merciful and kind to the unfortunate. To those who
think such qualities likely to belong to a poisoner and murderess, her
condemnation must be left. It is curious that neither Vergil, Horace, nor
Propertius mention or allude to Livia; nor does Ovid do so until after
the death of Augustus—for the _consolatio ad Liviam_ on the death of
Drusus is not his. On some of the inscriptions of a later period in the
reign her name appears among the imperial family as wife of the Princeps.
That was itself an innovation, and it seems as if the poets abstained
from mentioning her under orders. It was improper for a matron of high
rank to be made public property in this way. Horace, for instance, only
once alludes to the wife of Mæcenas, and then under a feigned name.

Of those who influenced the earlier policy of Augustus, and supported
him in the first twenty years of the Principate, the first place must be
given to Agrippa and Mæcenas.

M. VIPSANIUS AGRIPPA (B.C. 63-13), differed widely from Mæcenas, but
was like him in constant attachment and fidelity to Augustus. He was
with him in Apollonia, and on the news of the murder of Iulius advised
an appeal to the army. Even before this he had accompanied him to Spain
when he went to join his uncle in B.C. 45, and ever afterwards served him
with unswerving fidelity and conspicuous success. In the war with Sextus
Pompeius, at Perusia, in Gaul, Spain and Illyria, in the organisation of
the East, and on the Bosporus, it was his energy and ability that decided
the contest in favour of his master, or secured the settlement that he
desired. He was the organiser of the Roman navy, and though his great
work at the Lucrine lake proved to be only temporary, the squadrons that
guarded the seas at Misenum, Ravenna and Forum Iulii were the result
of his activity and foresight. His acts of splendid liberality in Rome
have been already noticed. He shewed the same magnificence in Gaul and
elsewhere, and seems also to have largely assisted in the great survey
of the empire instituted by Augustus. Not only did he support all the
plans and ideas of his master, he was ready to take any position and make
any personal sacrifice to further his views. After his first marriage
to Pomponia, by whom he was the father of Vipsania, he was married to
Marcella, the Emperor’s niece. To support his master’s plans for the
succession he submitted to divorce her and marry Iulia, after having
previously made way for the rise of Marcellus by accepting a command in
the East. The Emperor shewed his confidence in him on every occasion. In
B.C. 23 when he thought himself dying he placed his seal in his hands,
in B.C. 18 he caused him to be admitted to share his tribunician power
for five years, which was renewed again in B.C. 13; so that though his
two sons were adopted by Augustus, the succession would almost certainly
have fallen to him had the Emperor died in their minority. This elevation
however did not give him rest: the last years of his life were spent
in the East, on the Bosporus and in Pannonia, from which last he only
returned to die. This faithful service had been rendered in spite of
the fact that he had advised against the acceptance of the principate.
He had urged the financial difficulties, the irreconcilable nature of
the opposition, the impossibility of drawing back, and Octavian’s own
weak health. But when his master preferred the advice of Mæcenas, he
took his part in the undertaking without faltering and with splendid
loyalty. Though Augustus owed much of his success to his own cautious
statesmanship, he owed even more to the man who failed in nothing that he
undertook, and would claim no honour for himself in return. The Emperor
delivered the funeral oration over this loyal servant, and, deposited his
ashes in the Mausoleum which he had built for his own family.

[Illustration: MÆCENAS.

_Photographed from the Head in the Palazzo dei Conservatori, Rome, by
Edne. Alinari._

_To face page 279._

P. VERGILIUS MARO.

_Photographed from the Bust in the Capitoline Museum, Rome, by Edne.
Alinari._

_Page 284._]

C. CILNIUS MÆCENAS (_circ._ B.C. 65-B.C. 8), was probably a few years
older than Augustus, but near enough to his age to have been one of
his companions at Apollonia. His influence was maintained till about
B.C. 16. It is most conspicuous from the time immediately following the
Perusian war. He negotiated the marriage with Scribonia, the peace of
Brundisium with Antony (B.C. 40), and the subsequent reconciliation of
B.C. 38. In the war against Sextus Pompeius (B.C. 38-36), he was partly
with Augustus, but partly at Rome, with full powers to act for him and
even to alter his despatches and letters as seemed necessary, having
the triumvir’s private seal entrusted to him for that purpose. This
was possible from the fact of such letters being written by amanuenses
and being therefore only recognisable by the seal. Thus Cicero often
commissions Atticus to write formal letters to his friends for him.
This position—it was no definite office, or perhaps was more like being
_legatus_ to Octavian than anything else—he seems to have retained
till after the battle of Actium, at which he probably was not present,
though that has been disputed. He detected the conspiracy of the younger
Lepidus, and sent him to Octavian to be judged. In B.C. 29, on Octavian’s
return from the East, he recommended the establishment of a despotism,
as a republic was no longer possible. The speech preserved by Dio (52,
14-40) may very well be genuine, in view of the habit of the day, and
of Augustus himself, of reading addresses even in comparatively private
conferences on matters of importance.[318] Even if it is not the genuine
speech, it correctly represents many of the principles on which Augustus
did act, and as to which he doubtless consulted Mæcenas. It counsels him
to keep in his hands legislation, foreign affairs, elections, executive
appointments and the courts of law, and to hear cases of appeal himself:
exactly what Augustus did under various disguises. It argues that it
was necessary both for his own safety and that of the state that he
should remain in power, the glory being well worth the risk. Other
recommendations are a reform of Senate and equites, the maintenance of
the old republican magistrates for home service, the establishment of a
_præfectus urbi_, the exercise by himself of censorial functions, the
subordination of provincial governors to the Emperor, and their payment
by a fixed salary, with the appointment of procurators to superintend
the finances of the provinces. A system of education for the equites
is also suggested, which does not seem to have been carried out; but
many of the financial proposals were adopted, as well as the idea of
keeping the people amused by games and shows. The advice to abolish the
_comitia_ Augustus could not follow consistently with his policy of
compromise. They remained and were the causes of more than one trouble
and disturbance, but their freedom of election was gradually but surely
destroyed, and one of the first measures of Tiberius was to abolish them
as no longer a reality. The reform of the Senate was, as we have seen,
carried out. As for the judicia, the Senate became a high court for cases
of treason (_maiestas_), before which alone Senators could be tried;
the _decuriæ iudicum_ were reformed, and Augustus himself performed
the functions of a court of appeal in various ways, sometimes by his
tribunician power of “interceding” against the sentences of magistrates
or Senate, and sometimes by hearing cases from the provinces of citizens
who disputed the competence of provincial courts and claimed to be
heard at Rome. Mæcenas holding no office never became a Senator; but he
represented the Emperor in his absence, unless Agrippa was appointed to
do so instead. In this capacity he really exercised a greater power than
any definite office would have given him, and the whole business of the
Empire passed through his hands.[319]

But it was not only as the ostensible representative of the Emperor that
he worked for his support. In the comparative retirement of his palace on
the Esquiline he contributed to that object by gathering round him the
best intellects and first men of letters of the day, whom he induced to
devote their talents not only to glorify the Emperor personally, but to
popularise his policy and magnify his service to the state. How far this
may have been effectual by making it the fashion to accept and admire the
principate may perhaps be questioned, but that he should have secured
such writers as Vergil, Horace, and Propertius on his side says much for
his insight and literary taste. One of the weaknesses of the position
of Iulius had been that he had the literary class mostly against him.
The present reputation and future fame of Augustus were to be better
safeguarded. Personally Mæcenas was luxurious and effeminate, always a
valetudinarian, and in his later years afflicted with almost constant
insomnia. This accounts well enough for the retirement from public
business during the last eight years of his life without those other
causes of the Emperor’s displeasure which have been already discussed.
His wife was a beauty, much younger than himself, wilful and wayward;
and if it is true that she intrigued with Augustus, it seems also true
that her husband repaid her in kind. There were frequent quarrels and
reconciliations, so that Seneca says that he married her “a thousand
times;” and once at any rate the family trouble found its way into the
law courts, where, however, the _bona fides_ of the divorce which she
was alleged to have made was questioned.[320] In spite of some coldness
between them in later years, and the physical infirmities which removed
him from public business, Augustus sincerely mourned his loss, as of a
counsellor who never betrayed his confidence or spoke idle words. He had
no real successor. From the time of his death the Emperor seems more and
more to have become his own prime minister, or to have looked to his own
family for assistance as well as for a successor. Tacitus (_Ann._ 3, 30)
says that his place was taken by Sallustius Crispus, great-nephew of
the historian; but Augustus does not seem to have thought highly of his
ability, and the part he took in affairs was not prominent enough to have
secured mention by either Suetonius or Dio. Mæcenas wrote himself both
in prose and verse, but in an affected and obscure style, which Augustus
playfully ridiculed. The stoic Seneca is particularly severe on a poem
in which he declares that he clings to life in spite of all physical
sufferings however painful:—

    “Though racked with gout in hand and foot,
    Though cancer deep should strike its root,
    Though palsy shake my feeble thighs,
    Though hideous hump on shoulders rise,
    From flaccid gum teeth drop away;
    Yet all is well if life but stay.
    Give me but life, and e’en the pain
    Of sharpest cross shall count as gain.”

[Sidenote: Augustus and the poets.]

The chief writers of the Mæcenas circle, who either became intimate
with Augustus himself, or were induced by Mæcenas to join in the chorus
of praise, were Vergil, Varius, Horace, Propertius. Of the epics of L.
Varius Rufus (_circ._ B.C. 64-14) on Iulius Cæsar and Augustus, we have
only a few fragments. The historian, Livy, (B.C. 59-A.D. 16) was also on
friendly terms with Augustus, and seems to have had some hand in teaching
Claudius, son of Drusus, the future emperor. But his great work—from
the foundation of Rome to the death of Drusus (B.C. 9) was afterwards
regarded as being too republican, and even Augustus used laughingly to
call him the Pompeian. It was the poets who made Augustus and his policy
the subject of their praises, and who employed their genius to support
his views.

[Sidenote: Vergil.]

The first to do this was P. Vergilius Maro (B.C. 70-17). The earliest
of his writings, the _Eclogues_, composed between B.C. 42-37, do not
show any close connection with Augustus. The first indeed celebrates the
restoration of his farm after a personal interview with Octavian, on the
suggestion of Pollio and Mæcenas, and the poet declares that never will
there fade from his heart the gracious look of the young prince. But the
chief object of praise in the _Eclogues_, so far as there is one, is
Pollio, who had been left in charge of the distribution of lands by the
Triumvirs in B.C. 42. In the _Georgics_, however, finished after B.C. 30,
we find that he has fallen in with the new _régime_. They are dedicated
to the minister Mæcenas, they celebrate Augustus’s triple triumph of
B.C. 29, and they were composed partly, at any rate, at the wish of
Mæcenas, who with Augustus was anxious to make country life and pursuits
seem desirable. No doubt the theme itself was congenial to Vergil, who
preferred a country life at Nola, or near Tarentum, to the bustle of
Rome; but it also happened to chime in with the views of Augustus, who
all his life believed in the influence of literature and wished to have
the poets on his side. Accordingly, soon after his return from the East
in B.C. 29 he seems to have suggested to Vergil to compose a poem that
would inspire men with a feeling of national pride and an enthusiasm
for the greatness of Rome’s mission. The plan and form were no doubt
wholly Vergil’s, but the spirit and purpose, like those of Horace’s more
patriotic odes of about the same time, were those which the Emperor
desired. He was not satisfied with mere suggestion, he was eager for
the appearance of the poem. While in Gaul and Spain from B.C. 27-24 he
frequently wrote to the poet urging the completion of the work. A part of
one of Vergil’s answers has been preserved:

“As to my Æneas, upon my honour if I had anything written worth your
listening to, I would gladly send it. But the subject thus begun is so
vast, that I almost think I must have been beside myself when I undertook
a work of this magnitude; especially considering that—as you are aware—I
am also devoting part of my time to different and much more important
studies.”

The _Æneid_ was thus undertaken at the solicitation of Augustus. The
legend on which it turns—perhaps a late one—of the landing of Æneas
in Italy and the foundation of Rome by his descendant, is with great
skill interwoven with a fanciful descent of the _gens Iulia_ from his
son Iulus, to magnify Rome and her divine mission, and at the same
time to point to Augustus as the man of destiny, and as representing
in his own person and career the majesty of the Roman people. In such
a poem detailed allusions cannot be expected as in the occasional odes
of Horace. Yet, besides the fine passage in the eighth book describing
the victory of Actium and the discomfiture of Cleopatra, and that in
the sixth announcing the victorious career of Augustus, we have, more
or less, direct references to the restoration of religious worship in
the _vici_, to the return of the standards by the Parthians, and the
death of the young Marcellus. In form, the _Æneid_ follows the model of
Homer, the supreme epic. But in substance it is original, in that it
does not take for its theme one of the old myths—as the Alexandrine poets
always did—but while teeming with all kinds of mythological allusions it
finds its chief inspiration in the greatness of Rome, measured by the
elemental strife preceding the accomplishment of the divine purpose:
_tantæ molis erat Romanam condere gentem_—“So vast the task to found the
Roman race,” is the keynote of the whole. It is original as the epic of
Milton was original who, with details borrowed from every quarter, took
for his theme the foundation of a world and the strife in heaven that
preceded it. Vergil’s epic is Roman history on the highest plane, and has
crystallised for ever a view of that history which has done more than
arms and laws to commend it to the imagination of mankind. Augustus had a
true intuition when he forbade the poet’s executors to obey his will and
burn the rolls containing this great national epic.

