[Sidenote: Horace.]

Q. HORATIUS FLACCUS (B.C. 65-B.C. 8) is not perhaps so great a poet as
Vergil, but he possessed the charm which keeps such work as his alive.
His connection with Augustus is a remarkable phenomenon in literary
history. Having fought on the side of his enemies at Philippi, and having
shared in the amnesty granted to the bulk of the troops, he returned home
to find his paternal property confiscated. Poverty drove him to poetry,
poetry gained him the friendship of Varius and Vergil, who introduced
him to Mæcenas, who saw his merit, relieved him from the uncongenial
employment of a clerk, and eventually introduced him to Augustus. The
Emperor, in his turn, was not long in recognising his charm. He writes to
Mæcenas:

“In old times I was vigorous enough to write my friends’ letters for
them. Nowadays being overwhelmed with business and weak in health, I am
very anxious to entice Horace away from you. He shall therefore quit your
table of parasites and come to my table of kings and assist me in writing
letters.”

The refusal of Horace—prudent no doubt in view of his tastes and
habits—did not lose him the Emperor’s favour. He twice received
substantial marks of it, and some extracts or letters to him from
Augustus have been preserved which exhibit the latter in his most
gracious mood:

“Consider yourself a privileged person in my house, as though an habitual
guest at my table. You will be quite within your rights and will always
be sure of a welcome; for it is my wish that our intimacy should be on
that footing if your state or health permits it.”

And again:

“What a warm recollection I retain of you, you will be able to learn from
Septimius among others, as I happened to be talking about you in his
presence the other day. For you need not suppose, because you were so
high and mighty as to reject my friendship, that I am on the high horse
too to pay you back.”

Augustus, in fact, had a great opinion of Horace, and predicted his
immortality. He selected him to write the ode for the secular games,
pressed him later in life to immortalise the achievements of Tiberius and
Drusus, and was desirous of his own name appearing as the recipient of
one of his Satires or Epistles.

“I am quite angry, let me tell you, that you don’t give me the preference
as a person to address in your writings of that kind. Are you afraid
that an appearance of intimacy with me will damage your reputation with
posterity?”

Horace made the Emperor a return in full for such condescension. How far
the genius of a poet is warmed or chilled by patronage it is not easy to
decide. So far as he is tempted away from his natural bent, or confined
in the free expression of thought, he suffers: so far as he is saved
from sordid cares, he is a gainer. Horace, in early youth, sympathised
with the republican party in whose ranks he had served, and probably in
later life still felt a theoretical preference for it, and could speak
of the _nobile letum_ and _atrox animus_ of Cato with a true note of
admiration, But he was a man of his time. The policy of Octavian had made
the supremacy of Augustus inevitable, and it at least secured peace and
safety. The patronage and liberality of Mæcenas assuredly helped to turn
the scale, but I see no reason to doubt that the poet was convinced,
though, perhaps, without enthusiasm, that the new _régime_ was one to
be supported by reasonable men. The kindness of the Emperor naturally
enhanced the effect of his commanding personality, but it would be
difficult for a poet so placed to write with greater dignity and less
fulsomeness than Horace does in the first epistle of the second book,
addressed to Augustus at his own request. But it is in the _Odes_ that we
must trace the unbroken sympathy with the career and policy of Augustus.
If they are closely examined, with an eye to chronological arrangement,
the ingenuity with which these imitations of Greek models are framed to
support and recommend the purposes or celebrate the successes of the
Emperor, will stand revealed in a striking manner. The _Epodes_ and the
first three books of the _Odes_ were apparently written between B.C. 35
and B.C. 25. Dropped in among a number of poems of fancy, or passion, or
mere literary _tours de force_, are compositions that follow not only the
actual achievements of Augustus, but his ideals, his intentions, and his
aspirations, from the years just before Actium to his return from Spain
in B.C. 25. We begin with the Second Epode, which refers with regret to
the abandoned intention of invading Britain in B.C. 35, and expresses
his alarm at the prospect of a renewed civil war. In the Sixteenth Epode
this terror has become a reality; the civil war has begun, and the poet,
foreseeing the downfall of the state, turns longing eyes to the peace and
calm of the fabled islands of the West. From Italy and all its horrors
they must at any rate depart. In the Ninth Epode the relief has come; the
shameful servitude of a Roman imperator and Roman soldiers to a foreign
queen is over; Antony and Cleopatra are in full flight (B.C. 31). In
another year it is known that Antony has fallen by his own hand, and that
Cleopatra has saved herself the indignity of the triumphal procession by
the adder’s aid (_Od._ i. 39). The discharge of the legions follows, and
their settlement in Italian and Sicilian lands (2 _Sat._, 6, 54). In the
other odes of the first book the devotion to Augustus proceeds apace.
The Iulian star is in the ascendant (1, 2, 20); Augustus is _pater_
and _princeps_, anticipating the future titles (1, 2, 20); he is again
contemplating the invasion of Britain (1, 35, 29); the Arabian expedition
is being planned with all its futile hopes of wealth (1, 29; 1, 35). In
the second book of the _Odes_, beginning with reflections on the evils
of civil war (2, 1), the poet notices one after the other the triumphs
of Augustus or his generals in B.C. 27-24. The Cantabrian war (2, 6, 2;
2, 11, 1); the triumphal arch at Susa (2, 9, 19); the success of his
diplomacy in Scythia, Armenia, and Parthia (_ib._) In the third book the
embassy of British chiefs is treated as though the island were annexed
(3, 5, 2); the Cantabrians are regarded as conquered after the expedition
of Augustus (3, 8, 22; 3, 14). Then succeeds a period of statesmanship
and reform. The Emperor’s Roman policy, and his determination to keep
Rome the centre of government, are warmly supported (3, 3); the moral
evils, the extravagance and debauchery of the age must be cured, and
Horace proceeds to support the abortive legislation of B.C. 27, and to
foreshadow the censorial acts, and the legislation of B.C. 18. There
is a protest against the magnificence and extent of country houses (2,
15); against the effeminacy of youth (iii. 2); against the immorality
of women and the licentiousness that led to civil strife (3, 24). The
_Carmen sæculare_ speaks of the legislation as effected, and foretells
its success (20); while in the fourth book he asserts that, at any rate
while Augustus is with them, that success has been secured (4, 5), and
that he has not only given them peace, but a great moral reform (4, 15).
The policy of the Emperor in regard to the bugbear of the East, the
Parthian power, is also followed step by step. They are the dangerous
enemy whose subjection will make Augustus divine (3, 5, 1-4), and whose
threatened invasions keep his ministers in constant anxiety (3, 29, 27).
This is before B.C. 20; but in B.C. 19 they have made submission and
restored the standards and prisoners (_Epist._ i. 18, 56), and this is
one of the triumphs of Augustus that requires a master hand to record
(_Epist._ ii. 1, 255); it is the glory of the Augustan age (_Od._ 4,
15, 6), and as long as Augustus is safe, no one will fear them more (4,
5, 25). Finally, at the Emperor’s request, he celebrated the victories
of Drusus and Tiberius over the Vindelici and Rhæti (4, 4 and 14), and
especially the defeat of the Sugambri who had routed Lollius (4, 2, 34;
4, 14, 51), with a compliment to Augustus himself for having gone to
Gaul to support Tiberius and Drusus with reinforcements and advice (4,
14, 33), and for having at length closed the door of Ianus (4, 15, 9).
The lyrical career of Horace, therefore, corresponds remarkably with the
activities of Augustus. His genius presented those activities to his
fellow citizens (and Horace’s verses were soon read in schools) exactly
in the light in which the Emperor wished them to be viewed. If we lay
aside some expressions of overstrained compliment, which favoured the
growing fashion of paying the Emperor divine honours, it cannot be said
that the language is fulsome or degrading to the poet. The “parasitic
table” of Mæcenas may, as M. Beulé asserts, have been a misfortune to
the poets, and attenuated their vein of inspiration: but a man must have
something in practical life on which to pin his faith; and Horace might
have done worse than devote his genius to promote loyalty to the great
statesman who had saved Roman society and given peace and prosperity to
an empire. Just as Vergil, if he had followed his own impulse, might have
perhaps produced a fine poem on the Epicurean cosmogony, but not one that
lives and breathes with the noble glow of patriotism.

[Sidenote: Propertius.]

Sextus Propertius (_circ._ B.C. 45-_circ._ B.C. 15) was another of the
Mæcenas circle of poets who did something to glorify Augustus. He is
not (but that is a personal opinion) on anything like the same level as
either Vergil or Horace as an artist. He is said to have died young,
perhaps at thirty years of age, and there is no evidence of personal
intimacy with Augustus, but there is some indication of his having been
on bad terms with Horace. His elegies also are nearly all poems of
passion. Politics and emperors are mere episodes, and were introduced
in deference to Mæcenas. Still many points in the career of Augustus
are referred to in the same spirit as that of Horace. The siege of
Perusia—described in tones of horror, which would scarcely have been
acceptable—precedes his conversion (1, 21), and the failure of the
marriage law of B.C. 27 is only referred to with relief (2, 7, 1). In
more complimentary terms he speaks of the victory of Actium (3, 7, 44),
and of the downfall of Antony and Cleopatra (4, 8, 56; 4, 10, 32, _sqq._;
4, 7, 56); and the end of the civil wars is attributed to Augustus (_illa
qua vicit condidit arma manu_, 3, 8, 41). Then came the intended invasion
of Britain (3, 23, 5); the Arabian expedition and the Indian envoys (3,
1, 15; 4, 3 1); the opening and description of the Palatine Library—the
best extant (3, 29); the raids of the Sugambri and their suppression (5,
6, 77); while he has the Parthians frequently on his lips, though rather
as predicting what is to be done with them than as recording the return
of the standards.[321] In the fifth book there are signs of a beginning
of a _Fasti_ like that of Ovid as a record of events in Roman history;
and it is possible that this was in obedience to a wish of Augustus,
who, on his death, transferred the task to Ovid. Thus his voice also was
secured, in part at least, in support of the imperial _régime_.

[Sidenote: Ovid.]

Publius Ovidius Naso (B.C. 43-A.D. 18) belongs to the last part of the
reign. He had only seen Vergil, and though he had heard Horace recite,
he does not profess to have known him. He was quite young when Augustus
was winning his position and reforming the constitution, and there
are no signs of his coming forward as a court poet till Mæcenas and
his circle had disappeared, and if he had attracted the attention of
Augustus at all, it was probably not altogether in a favourable manner.
His earliest poems—the _Amores_ and _Heroidum Epistulæ_—do not touch
on public affairs; they are poems of passion—the former personal, the
latter dramatic. In the _Ars Amatoria_ (about B.C. 2-A.D. 2) for the
first time we detect the court poet from a complimentary allusion to the
approaching mission of Gaius Cæsar to Syria and Armenia, with his title
of _princeps iuventutis_ and that of Augustus as _pater patriæ_, as also
to the _naumachia_ or representation of the battle of Salamis given by
Augustus in the flooded _nemus Cæsarum_ in B.C. 2 (_A. A._, 1, 171-2).
The _Metamorphoses_ had been composed before his exile in A.D. 9, but
after the death of Augustus he apparently introduced the Epilogue (xv.
745 _sq._) containing an eulogy on Tiberius, and on the now finished
career of Augustus. It is the _Fasti_—the Calendar of events in Roman
history—that probably was undertaken in obedience to a wish of the
Emperor, and in which accordingly we find points in his career touched
upon. It was dedicated to Germanicus, and contains an allusion to his
own exile, and was therefore, partly at least, composed between B.C.
2 and A.D. 10. His allusions to Augustus are not those of an intimate
acquaintance, but of an admiring subject—real or feigned. He mentions the
battle of Mutina (iv. 627); the bestowal of the title Augustus (i. 589);
the recovery of the standards from the Parthians as a triumph of the
Emperor (vi. 467). He alludes to Augustus becoming Pontifex Maximus (iii.
415); to the laurels on his palace front (iv. 957); to the demolition of
the house of Vedius Pollio as connected with the reforms and the laws
of B.C. 18 (vi. 637); to the division of the city into _vici_, and the
worship of the Lares Augusti (v. 145); to the Forum Augusti and the
temple of Mars dedicated in B.C. 2. (v. 551, _sqq._). Ovid afterwards
protested that his books had been read with pleasure by Augustus, and
assumed to have some knowledge of the private chambers of the palace
(Trist., 1, 5, 2; 2, 520), but there is nothing in the allusions to
matters which he knew that Augustus wished to have recorded that has the
air of close or intimate relations. They are the conventional expressions
of the outside, and perhaps humble, panegyrist, not those of a friend
and supporter, like Horace. The abject expressions in the Tristia and
the letters from Pontus need not be taken into account. They are merely
bids for a recall, and they often express in the crudest form the growing
fashion of worshipping the Emperor or his genius. Perhaps the most
subtle of these appeals is that in which he explains why he had spent
his youth in writing frivolous poetry instead of celebrating the glories
of the Emperor—he was not a good enough poet, and would have dishonoured
a subject above his reach (Tr., ii. 335-340). This was using a weapon
forged by the Emperor himself, who had always let it be known that he
disliked being the subject of inferior artists. The melancholy and
feebleness of these later poems of Ovid seem to bear a sort of analogy
with the cloud that descended on the later years of Augustus. Vergil and
Horace have the freshness of the morning or the vigour of noon, Ovid the
gathering sadness of the evening.




AUGUSTUS’S ACCOUNT OF HIS REIGN (FROM THE INSCRIPTION IN THE TEMPLE OF
ROME AND AUGUSTUS AT ANGORA)


1. When I was nineteen I collected an army on my own account and at my
own expense, by the help of which I restored the republic to liberty,
which had been enslaved by the tyranny of a faction; for which services
the Senate, in complimentary decrees, added my name to the roll of
their House in the consulship of Gaius Pansa and Aulus Hirtius [B.C.
43], giving me at the same time consular precedence in voting; and gave
me imperium. It ordered me as proprætor “to see along with the consuls
that the republic suffered no damage.” Moreover, in the same year, both
consuls having fallen, the people elected me consul and a triumvir for
revising the constitution.

2. Those who killed my father I drove into exile, after a legal trial,
in punishment of their crime, and afterwards when these same men rose in
arms against the republic I conquered them twice in a pitched battle.

3. I had to undertake wars by land and sea, civil and foreign, all over
the world, and when victorious I spared surviving citizens. Those foreign
nations, who could safely be pardoned, I preferred to preserve rather
than exterminate. About 500,000 Roman citizens took the military oath to
me. Of these I settled out in colonies or sent back to their own towns,
after their terms of service were over, considerably more than 300,000;
and to them all I assigned lands purchased by myself or money in lieu
of lands. I captured 600 ships, not counting those below the rating of
triremes.

4. I twice celebrated an ovation, three times curule triumphs, and was
twenty-one times greeted as imperator. Though the Senate afterwards voted
me several triumphs I declined them. I frequently also deposited laurels
in the Capitol after performing the vows which I had taken in each war.
For successful operations performed by myself or by my legates under
my auspices by land and sea, the Senate fifty-three times decreed a
supplication to the immortal gods. The number of days during which, in
accordance with a decree of the Senate, supplication was offered amounted
to 890. In my triumphs there were led before my chariot nine kings or
sons of kings. I had been consul thirteen times at the writing of this,
and am in the course of the thirty-seventh year of my tribunician power
[A.D. 13-14].

5. The Dictatorship offered me in my presence and absence by the
Senate and people in the consulship of Marcus Marcellus and Lucius
Arruntius [B.C. 22] I declined to accept. I did not refuse at a time
of very great scarcity of corn the commissionership of corn supply,
which I administered in such a way that within a few days I freed the
whole people from fear and danger. The consulship—either yearly or for
life—then offered to me I declined to accept.

6. In the consulship of M. Vinicius and Q. Lucretius [B.C. 19], of P. and
Cn. Lentulus [B.C. 18], and of Paullus Fabius Maximus and Q. Tubero [B.C.
11], when the Senate and people of Rome unanimously agreed that I should
be elected overseer of the laws and morals, with unlimited powers and
without a colleague, I refused every office offered me which was contrary
to the customs of our ancestors. But what the Senate at that time wished
me to manage, I carried out in virtue of my tribunician power, and in
this office I five times received at my own request a colleague from the
Senate.

7. I was one of the triumvirate for the re-establishment of the
constitution for ten consecutive years. I have been _princeps senatus_ up
to the day on which I write this for forty years. I am Pontifex Maximus,
Augur, one of the fifteen commissioners for religion, one of the seven
