for sacred feasts, an Arval brother, a _sodalis Titius_, a fetial.

8. In my fifth consulship [B.C. 29] I increased the number of the
patricians by order of people and Senate. I three times made up the roll
of the Senate, and in my sixth consulship [B.C. 28] I took a census of
the people with M. Agrippa as my colleague. I performed the _lustrum_
after an interval of forty-one years; in which the number of Roman
citizens entered on the census roll was 4,063,000. A second time with
consular imperium I took the census by myself in the consulship of Gaius
Censorinus and Gaius Asinius [B.C. 8], in which the number of Roman
citizens entered on the roll was 4,223,000. I took a third census with
consular imperium, my son Tiberius Cæsar acting as my colleague, in the
consulship of Sextus Pompeius and Sextus Appuleius [A.D. 14], in which
the number of Roman citizens entered on the census roll was 4,937,000. By
new laws passed I recalled numerous customs of our ancestors that were
falling into desuetude in our time, and myself set precedents in many
particulars for the imitation of posterity.

9. The Senate decreed that vows should be offered for my health by
consuls and priests every fifth year. In fulfilment of these vows the
four chief colleges of priests or the consuls often gave games in my
lifetime. Also individually and by townships the people at large always
offered sacrifices at all the temples for my health.

10. By a decree of the Senate my name was included in the ritual of the
Salii; and it was ordained by a law that my person should be sacred and
that I should have the tribunician power for the term of my natural life.
I refused to become Pontifex Maximus in succession to my colleague during
his life, though the people offered me that sacred office formerly held
by my father. Some years later I accepted that sacred office on the death
of the man who had availed himself of the civil disturbance to secure
it; such a multitude flocking to my election from all parts of Italy as
is never recorded to have come to Rome before, in the consulship of P.
Sulpicius and C. Valgius [6 March, B.C. 12].

11. The Senate consecrated an altar to Fortuna Redux, near the temple
of Honour and Virtue, by the Porta Capena, for my return, on which it
ordered the Vestal Virgins to offer a yearly sacrifice on the day on
which in the consulship of Q. Lucretius and M. Vinicius [B.C. 19] I
returned to the city from Syria, and gave that day the name _Augustalia_
from my cognomen [15 Dec.].

12. By a decree of the Senate at the same time part of the prætors and
tribunes of the plebs, along with the consul Q. Lucretius and leading
nobles, were despatched into Campania to meet me—an honour that up to
this time has been decreed to no one else. When I returned to Rome from
Spain and Gaul after successful operations in those provinces, in the
consulship of Tiberius Nero and Publius Quintilius [B.C. 13], the Senate
voted that an altar to Pax Augusta should be consecrated for my return on
the Campus Martius, upon which it ordered the magistrates and priests and
Vestal Virgins to offer an annual sacrifice [30 Jan.].

13. Whereas the Ianus Quirinus, which our ancestors ordered to be closed
when peace throughout the whole dominions of the Roman people by land and
sea had been obtained by victories, is recorded to have been only twice
shut before my birth since the foundation of the city, the Senate three
times voted its closure during my principate.

14. My sons Gaius and Lucius Cæsar, whom fortune snatched from me in
their early manhood, in compliment to me, the Senate and Roman people
designated consuls in their fifteenth year with a proviso that they
should enter on that office after an interval of five years. From the day
of their assuming the _toga virilis_ the Senate decreed that they should
take part in public business. Moreover, the Roman equites in a body gave
each of them the title of _Princeps Iuventutis_, and presented them with
silver shields and spears.

15. To the Roman plebs I paid 300 sesterces per head in virtue of
my father’s will; and in my own name I gave 400 apiece in my fifth
consulship [B.C. 29] from the sale of spoils of war; and a second time
in my tenth consulship [B.C. 24] out of my own private property I paid
a bounty of 400 sesterces per man, and in my eleventh consulship [B.C.
23] I measured out twelve distributions of corn, having purchased the
grain from my own resources. In the twelfth year of my tribunician power
[B.C. 11], I for the third time gave a bounty of 400 sesterces a head.
These largesses of mine affected never less than 50,200 persons. In
the eighteenth year of my tribunician power and my twelfth consulship
[B.C. 5] I gave 320,000 of the urban plebs sixty denarii a head. In the
colonies of my soldiers, in my fifth consulship [B.C. 29] I gave from the
sale of spoils of war 1,000 sesterces a head; and among such settlers
the number who received that triumphal largess amounted to about 120,000
men. In my thirteenth consulship [B.C. 2] I gave 60 denarii apiece to the
plebeians then in receipt of public corn; they amounted to somewhat more
than 200,000 persons.

16. The money for the lands, which in my fourth consulship [B.C. 30], and
afterwards in the consulship of M. Crassus and Cn. Lentulus the augur
[B.C. 14], I assigned to the soldiers, I paid to the municipal towns. The
amount was about 600,000,000 sesterces, which I paid for lands in Italy,
and about 260,000,000 which I disbursed for lands in the provinces.

I was the first and only one within the memory of my own generation to
do this of all who settled colonies in Italy and the provinces. And
afterwards in the consulship of Tib. Nero and Cn. Piso [B.C. 7], and
again in the consulship of C. Antistius and D. Lælius [B.C. 6], and of C.
Calvisius and L. Pasienus [B.C. 4], and of L. Lentulus and M. Messalla
[B.C. 3], and of L. Caninius and Q. Fabricius [B.C. 2], to the soldiers,
whom after their terms of service I sent back to their own towns, I paid
good service allowances in ready money; on which I expended 400,000,000
sesterces as an act of grace.

17. I four times subsidised the _ærarium_ from my own money, the sums
which I thus paid over to the commissioners of the treasury amounting
to 150,000,000 sesterces. And in the consulship of M. Lepidus and L.
Arruntius [A.D. 6], to the military treasury, which was established on
my initiative for the payment of their good service allowance, to the
soldiers who had served twenty years or more, I contributed from my own
patrimony 170,000,000 sesterces.[322]

18. From and after the year of the consulship of Gnæus and Publius
Lentulus [B.C. 18], whenever the payment of the revenues were in arrear,
I paid into the treasury from my own patrimony the taxes, whether due in
corn or money, sometimes of 100,000 persons, sometimes of more.

19. I built the curia and Chalcidicum adjoining it, and the temples of
Apollo on the Palatine with its colonnades, the temple of the divine
Iulius, the Lupercal, the colonnade at the Flaminian circus, which I
allowed to be called Octavia, from the name of the builder of the earlier
one on the same site, the state box at the Circus Maximus, the temples
of Jupiter Feretrius and of Jupiter Tonans on the Capitol, the temple of
Quirinus, the temples of Minerva and of Juno the Queen, and of Jupiter
Liberalis on the Aventine, the temple of the Lares at the head of the
_via Sacra_, the temple of the divine Penates in the Velia, the temple of
Youth, the temple of the Mater Magna on the Palatine.

20. The Capitolium and the Pompeian theatre—both very costly works—I
restored without any inscription of my own name. Water-conduits in many
places that were decaying from age I repaired; and I doubled the aqueduct
called the Aqua Marcia, by turning a new spring into its channel.

The Forum Iulium and the basilica, which was between the temple of Castor
and the temple of Saturn, works begun and far advanced by my father, I
completed; and when the same basilica was destroyed by fire, I began its
reconstruction on an extended plan, to be inscribed with the names of my
sons, and in case I do not live to complete it I have ordered it to be
completed by my heirs.

In my sixth consulship [B.C. 28], I repaired eighty-two temples of
the gods in the city in accordance with a decree of the Senate, none
being omitted which at that time stood in need of repair. In my seventh
consulship [B.C. 27] I constructed the Flaminian road from the city to
Ariminum, and all the bridges except the Mulvian and Minucian.

21. On ground belonging to myself I built a temple to Mars Ultor and
the Forum Augustum, with money arising from sale of war spoils. I built
a theatre adjoining the temple of Apollo, on ground for the most part
purchased from private owners, to be under the name of my son-in-law
Marcus Marcellus. Offerings from money raised by sale of war-spoil I
consecrated in the temple of Apollo, and in the temple of Vesta, and in
the temple of Mars Ultor, which cost me about 100,000,000 sesterces.
Thirty-five thousand pounds of gold,[323] crown money contributed by
the municipia and colonies of Italy for my triumphs, I refunded in my
fifth consulship [B.C. 29], and subsequently, as often as I was greeted
Imperator, I refused to receive crown money, though the municipia and
colonies had decreed it with as much warmth as before.

22. I three times gave a show of gladiators in my own name, and five
times in the name of my sons and grandsons; in which shows about 10,000
men contended. I twice gave the people a show of athletes collected from
all parts of the world in my own name, and a third time in the name of my
grandson. I gave games in my own name four times, as representing other
magistrates twenty-three times. In behalf of the quindecimviri, and as
master of the college, with M. Agrippa as colleague, I gave the Secular
games in the consulship of C. Furnius and C. Silanus [B.C. 17]. In my
thirteenth consulship [B.C. 2], I gave for the first time the games of
Mars which, since that time, the consuls have given in successive years.
I gave the people wild-beast hunts, of African animals, in my own name
and that of my sons and grandsons, in the circus and forum, and the
amphitheatres twenty-six times, in which about 3,500 animals were killed.

23. I gave the people the spectacle of a naval battle on the other side
of the Tiber, in the spot where now is the grove of the Cæsars, the
ground having been hollowed out to a length of 1,800 feet, and a breadth
of 1,200 feet, in which thirty beaked ships, triremes or biremes, and
a still larger number of smaller vessels contended. In these fleets,
besides the rowers, there fought about three thousand men.

24. In the temples of all the states of the province of Asia, I replaced
the ornaments after my victory, which he with whom I had fought had taken
into his private possession from the spoliation of the temples. There
were about eighty silver statues of me, some on foot, some equestrian,
some in chariots, in various parts of the city. These I removed, and from
the money thus obtained I placed golden offerings in the temple of Apollo
in my own name and in that of those who had honoured me by the statues.

25. I cleared the sea of pirates. In that war I captured about 30,000
slaves, who had run away from their masters, and had borne arms against
the republic, and handed them back to their owners to be punished. The
whole of Italy took the oath to me spontaneously, and demanded that I
should be the leader in the war in which I won the victory off Actium.
The provinces of the Gauls, the Spains, Africa, Sicily, Sardinia, took
the same oath. Among those who fought under my standards were more than
seven hundred Senators, eighty-three of whom had been, or have since
been, consuls up to the time of my writing this, 170 members of the
sacred colleges.

26. I extended the frontiers of all the provinces of the Roman people,
which were bordered by tribes that had not submitted to our Empire. The
provinces of the Gauls, and Spains and Germany, bounded by the Ocean from
Gades to the mouth of the river Elbe, I reduced to a peaceful state. The
Alps, from the district near the Adriatic to the Tuscan sea, I forced to
remain peaceful without waging unprovoked war with any tribe. My fleet
sailed through the Ocean from the mouth of the Rhine towards the rising
sun, up to the territories of the Cimbri, to which point no Roman had
penetrated, up to that time, either by land or sea. The Cimbri, and
Charydes, and Semnones and other peoples of the Germans, belonging to
the same tract of country, sent ambassadors to ask for the friendship
of myself and the Roman people. By my command and under my auspices,
two armies were marched into Æthiopia and Arabia, called Felix, nearly
simultaneously, and large hostile forces of both these nations were cut
to pieces in battle, and a large number of towns were captured. Æthiopia
was penetrated as far as the town Nabata, next to Meroe. Into Arabia the
army advanced into the territories of the Sabæi as far as the town Mariba.

27. I added Egypt to the Empire of the Roman people. When I might have
made the Greater Armenia a province after the assassination of its king
Artaxes, I preferred, on the precedent of our ancestors, to hand over
that kingdom to Tigranes, son of King Artavasdes, grandson of King
Tigranes, by the hands of Tiberius Nero, who was then my stepson. The
same nation being afterwards in a state of revolt and rebellion, I handed
over to the government of King Ariobarzanes, son of Artabazus, king of
the Medes, after it had been reduced by my son Gaius; and after his death
to his son Artavasdes, upon whose assassination I sent Tigranes, a member
of the royal family of the Armenians, into that kingdom. I recovered all
the provinces on the other side of the Adriatic towards the East and
Cyrenæ, which were by this time for the most part held by various kings,
and before them Sicily and Sardinia which had been overrun by an army of
slaves.

28. I settled colonies of soldiers in Africa, Sicily, Macedonia, both
the Spains, Achaia, Asia, Syria, Gallia Narbonensis, Pisidia. Italy has
twenty-eight colonies established under my auspices, which have in my
lifetime become very densely inhabited and places of great resort.

29. A large number of military standards, which had been lost under other
commanders, I recovered, after defeating the enemy, from Spain and Gaul
and the Dalmatians. I compelled the Parthians to restore the spoils and
standards of three Roman armies, and to seek as suppliants the friendship
of the Roman people. These standards I laid up in the inner shrine
belonging to the temple of Mars Ultor.

30. The tribes of the Pannonii, which before I was _princeps_ an army of
the Roman people never reached, having been subdued by Tiberius Nero,
who was then my stepson and legate [B.C. 11], I added to the Empire of
the Roman people, and I extended the frontier of Illyricum to the bank
of the river Danube. And when an army of the Daci crossed to the south
of that river it was conquered and put to flight under my auspices; and
subsequently my army, being led across the Danube, forced the tribes of
the Daci to submit to the orders of the Roman people.

31. To me there were often sent embassies of kings from India, who had
never before been seen in the camp of any Roman general. By embassadors
the Bastarnæ and the Scythians and the kings of the Sarmatians, who live
on both sides of the river Don, and the king of the Albani and of the
Hiberi and of the Medes, sought our friendship.

32. Kings of the Parthians—Tiridates, and afterwards Phrates, son of
King Phrates—fled to me for refuge; of the Medes Artavasdes; of the
Adiabeni Artaxares; of the Britons Dumnobellaunus and Tim ...;[324] of
the Marcomanni and Suebi....[324] Phrates, king of the Parthians, son of
Orodes, sent all his sons and grandsons to me in Italy, not because he
had been overcome in war, but seeking our friendship by means of his own
sons as pledges. And a very large number of other nations experienced the
good faith of the Roman people while I was _princeps_, with whom before
that time there had been no diplomatic or friendly intercourse.

33. The nations of the Parthians and the chief men of the Medes by means
of embassies sought and accepted from me kings of those peoples—the
Parthians Vonones, son of King Phrates, grandson of King Orodes; the
Medes Ariobarzanes, son of King Artavasdes, grandson of King Ariobarzanes.

34. In my sixth and seventh consulships [B.C. 28, 27], when I had
extinguished the flames of civil war, having by universal consent become
possessed of the sole direction of affairs, I transferred the republic
from my power to the will of the Senate and people of Rome. For which
good service on my part I was by decree of the Senate called by the name
of Augustus, and the door-posts of my house were covered with laurels
in the name of the state, and a civic crown was fixed up over my door,
and a golden shield was placed in the Curia Iulia, which it was declared
by its inscription the Senate and people of Rome gave me in recognition
of valour, clemency, justice, piety. After that time I took precedence
of all in rank, but of power I had nothing more than those who were my
colleagues in the several magistracies.

35. While I was administering my thirteenth consulship [B.C. 2], the
Senate and equestrian order and the Roman people with one consent greeted
me as FATHER OF MY COUNTRY, and decreed that it should be inscribed in
the vestibule of my house, and in the Senate house, and in the Forum
Augustum, and under the chariot which was there placed in my honour in
accordance with a senatorial decree.

When I wrote this I was in my seventy-sixth year [A.D. 13-14].




FOOTNOTES


[1] _Ad capita bubula._ Lanciani (_Remains of Ancient Rome_, p. 139) says
